_Part 4_ Organizing 

## Chapter 11 

## **Organization Design** 

## **It’s Your Career** 

## Staying Connected 

Source: RAJ CREATIONZS/Shutterstock 

_**A key to success in management and in your career is knowing how to stay connected and in the organizational loop when you’re in a nontraditional working arrangement.**_ 

_The odds are good that at some point in your career, you’ll be offered the opportunity to telecommute/ work at home. (According to a recent survey, 37 percent of workers say their company offers that option._[1] _) And working from home can be a good thing. (A recent study showed that an employee’s efficiency can improve by 13 percent._[2] _) Although you might be efficient, not being physically at the workplace can make it seem like you’re totally disconnected from what’s going on. (Another recent study showed that telecommuters move up more slowly than their in-office peers._[3] _) When working as a remote employee—or even if you, at some point, manage someone in that kind of work arrangement— it’s important to find ways to make the work relationship, well . . . . work. And work well! Here are some suggestions for staying in the organizational loop and making yourself a valuable employee:_ 

_**1. Stay focused and productive.** Time management is absolutely critical. Plan ahead using goal setting and to-do lists (see Chapter 8’s opener and end-of-chapter skill application). Control—or even better, eliminate— interruptions and distractions. When you have work appointments (online, phone, Skype, etc.), keep them; and make sure you’re prepared by having the materials you will need for the conversation. Respect the schedules and time requirements of your colleagues. Finally, build in the kind of accountability you’d have in a traditional work arrangement. Recruit your manager or a colleague to be your accountability partner. Let them know what you intend to accomplish that day (or week) and check in daily (or weekly) to discuss what you’ve accomplished._ 

_**2. Communicate. Communicate. Communicate.** Communication is always important—regardless of where you do your work—but especially so when face-to-face exchanges are minimal or nonexistent. It’s critical to think before you communicate. Choose your communication approach carefully. There are times when a more matter-of-fact approach is the_ 

## Pearson MyLab Management[®] 

## **Improve Your Grade!** 

When you see this icon, visit **www.mymanagementlab.com** for activities that are applied, personalized, and offer immediate feedback. 

## **Learning Objectives** 

- _**11.1**_ **Describe** six key elements in organizational design. 

- _**11.2**_ **Contrast** mechanistic and organic structures. 

- _**11.3**_ **Discuss** the contingency factors that favor either the mechanistic model or the organic model of organizational design. 

- _**11.4**_ **Describe** traditional organizational design options. 

- _**11.5**_ **Discuss** organizing for flexibility in the twenty-first century. 

   - **Develop your skill** at acquiring and using power. 

   - **Know how** to stay connected and “in the loop” when working remotely. 

_best and times when a more personal touch is appropriate. Watch your “tone” (even in written communications) and be courteous. Hone your listening and “interpretation” skills. Try to understand the meaning behind what someone is saying in writing or when speaking._ 

_**3. Choose appropriate technology.** Know and choose the tools that are most appropriate for your situation. Will you need to collaborate with others or will your work be mainly solitary? What type of_ 

_communication will be necessary—e-mail, instant messaging, video messaging, etc.? Choose your tech tools wisely._ 

_**4. Be aware of the “people” aspects of remote work arrangements.** When a person is not physically at a workplace, it is hard to build closeness and camaraderie. But those things are still important. Find ways to combat the isolation and loneliness. Get to know your other team members (remote and in the workplace)._ 

Welcome to the fascinating world of organizational structure and design. In this chapter, we present the basics of organizing. We define the key organizing concepts and their components and how managers use these to create a structured environment in which organizational members can do their work efficiently and effectively. Once the organization’s goals, plans, and strategies are in place, managers must develop a structure that will best facilitate the attainment of those goals. 

## SIX **elements of organizational design** 

**LO11.1** The Boeing Company is reducing the build time for a 787 model widebody jetliner from 30 days to 24 days. That may not sound like much, but it is. Boeing Vice President Larry Loftis stated: “All in all, this is considered quite a feat 

**383** 

**384** _**Part 4**_ Organizing 

## **Exhibit 11-1** Purposes of Organizing 

Assigns tasks and responsibilities associated with individual jobs. Coordinates diverse organizational tasks. Clusters jobs into units. 

Establishes relationships among individuals, groups, and departments. Establishes formal lines of authority. 

Allocates and deploys organizational resources. 

## organizing 

Management function that involves arranging and structuring work to accomplish the organization’s goals 

## organizational structure 

The formal arrangement of jobs within an organization 

## organizational chart 

The visual representation of an organization’s structure 

## organizational design 

Creating or changing an organization’s structure 

## work specialization 

Dividing work activities into separate job tasks 

for an aircraft composed of 2.3 million parts.”[4] Management must be doing something right. The reliability of 787 aircraft is 99 percent. Getting there requires careful planning and coordination. Loftis indicated: “So the timing is really good for us because it allows us to take the personnel off the temporary surge line, move a number of them over to the main line, get the training in place, get them used to the jobs they’re going to be working to really de-risk the ramp up on the main line.”[5] Clearly, the work gets done efficiently and effectively here. Work also gets done efficiently and effectively at Cisco Systems, although not in such a structured and formal way. At Cisco, some 70 percent of the employees work from home at least 20 percent of the time.[6] Both of these organizations get needed work done, although each does so using a different structure. 

Few topics in management have undergone as much change in the past few years as that of organizing and organizational structure. Managers are reevaluating traditional approaches to find new structural designs that best support and facilitate employees doing the organization’s work—designs that can achieve efficiency but are also flexible.[7] 

In Chapter 1, we defined **organizing** as arranging and structuring work to accomplish organizational goals. It’s an important process, during which managers design an organization’s structure. **Organizational structure** is the formal arrangement of jobs within an organization. This structure, which can be shown visually in an **organizational chart** , also serves many purposes. (See Exhibit 11-1.) When managers create or change the structure, they’re engaged in **organizational design** , a process that involves decisions about six key elements: work specialization, departmentalization, chain of command, span of control, centralization and decentralization, and formalization.[8] 

## **Work Specialization** 

Lacing is one of 13 separate tasks involved in hand-crafting a Wilson Sporting Goods football. The company uses work specialization in dividing job activities as an organizing mechanism that helps employees boost their productivity and makes efficient use of workers’ diverse skills. Source: Bloomberg/Getty Images 

What do Joël Robuchon and Aureole have in common? Both are Las Vegas gourmet restaurants. Also, both restaurants staff their kitchens with culinary experts. For instance, pastry chefs prepare sumptuous desserts. The chef garde managers take responsibility for preparation of all cold food items, and multiple chefs de partie each take responsibility for preparing one type of food, such as fish, roasts, or fried foods. This is an example of **work specialization** , which is dividing work activities into separate job tasks. Individual employees “specialize” in doing part of an activity rather than the entire activity in order to increase work output and quality. It’s also known as division of labor, a concept we introduced in the management history module. Back at the gourmet restaurants, skilled executive chefs effectively manage all of the kitchen staff to ensure food quality and the coordinated preparation of the dinner courses from appetizers to desserts. 

Work specialization makes efficient use of the diversity of skills that workers have. In most organizations, some tasks require highly developed skills; others can be performed by employees with lower skill levels. If all workers were engaged in all the steps of, say, 

**Chapter 11** Organization Design **385** 

## **Exhibit 11-2** 

**==> picture [331 x 224] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
High<br>Impact from<br>human<br>diseconomies<br>Impact from<br>economies<br>of specialization<br>Low<br>Low High<br>Work Specialization<br>Productivity<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Economies and Diseconomies of Work Specialization 

a manufacturing process, all would need the skills necessary to perform both the most demanding and the least demanding jobs. Thus, except when performing the most highly skilled or highly sophisticated tasks, employees would be working below their skill levels. 

Early proponents of work specialization believed it could lead to great increases in productivity. At the beginning of the twentieth century, that generalization was reasonable. Because specialization was not widely practiced, its introduction almost always generated higher productivity. But, as Exhibit 11-2 illustrates, a good thing can be carried too far. At some point, the human diseconomies from division of labor— boredom, fatigue, stress, low productivity, poor quality, increased absenteeism, and high turnover—exceed the economic advantages.[9] 

**TODAY’S VIEW** Most managers today continue to see work specialization as important because it helps employees be more efficient. For example, McDonald’s uses high work specialization to get its products made and delivered to customers efficiently and quickly—that’s why it’s called “fast” food. One person takes orders at the drivethrough window, others cook and assemble the hamburgers, another works the fryer, another bags orders, and so forth. Such single-minded focus on maximizing efficiency has contributed to increasing productivity. In fact, at many McDonald’s, you’ll see a clock that times how long it takes employees to fill the order; look closer and you’ll probably see posted somewhere an order fulfillment time goal. At some point, however, work specialization no longer leads to productivity. That’s why companies such as Avery Dennison, Ford Australia, Hallmark, and American Express use minimal work specialization and instead give employees a broad range of tasks to do. 

## **Departmentalization** 

Does your college have a department of student services or financial aid department? Are you taking this course through a management department? After deciding what job tasks will be done by whom, common work activities need to be grouped back together so work gets done in a coordinated and integrated way. How jobs are grouped together is called **departmentalization** . Five common forms of departmentalization are used, although an organization may develop its own unique classification. (For instance, a hotel might have departments such as front desk operations, sales and catering, housekeeping and laundry, and maintenance.) Exhibit 11-3 illustrates each type of departmentalization as well as the advantages and disadvantages of each. 

## departmentalization 

The basis by which jobs are grouped together 

**386** _**Part 4**_ Organizing 

## **Exhibit 11-3** 

The Five Common Forms of Departmentalization 

**==> picture [309 x 9] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
FUNCTIONAL DEPARTMENTALIZATION—Groups Jobs According to Function<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**==> picture [407 x 214] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Plant Manager<br>Manager, Manager, Manager, Manager, Manager,<br>Engineering Accounting Manufacturing Human Resources Purchasing<br>enuneneanem<br>+ Efciencies from puttin g together similar s pecialties and<br>people with common skills, knowledge, and orientations<br>+ Coordination within functional area<br>+ In-depth specialization<br>– Poor communication across functional areas<br>– Limited view of organizational goals<br>GEOGRAPHICAL DEPARTMENTALIZATION—Groups Jobs According to Geographic Region<br>Vice President<br>for Sales<br>Sales Director, Sales Director, Sales Director,<br>Southern Region M idwestern Region Eastern Region<br>sanenem<br>+ More efective and efcient handling of specifc regional<br>issues that arise<br>+ Serve needs of unique geographic markets better<br>– Duplication of functions<br>Sales Director,<br>Western Region<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


- 

- Can feel isolated from other organizational areas 

## **PRODUCT DEPARTMENTALIZATION—Groups Jobs by Product Line** 

**==> picture [446 x 387] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Source : Bombardier Annual Report.<br>Bombardier, Ltd.<br>Mass Transit Recreational and Rail Products<br>Sector Utility Vehicles Sector Sector<br>Mass Transit Bombardier–Rotax Rail and Diesel<br>Division (Vienna) Products Division<br>Recreational Products Logistic Equipment Industrial Equipment Bombardier–Rotax<br>Division Division Division (Gunskirchen)<br>===<br>+ Allows specialization in particular products and services<br>+ Managers can become experts in their industry<br>+ Closer to customers<br>– Duplication of functions<br>– Limited view of organizational goals<br>PROCESS DEPARTMENTALIZATION—Groups Jobs on the Basis of Product or Customer Flow<br>Plant<br>Superintendent<br>Planing Lacquering Inspection<br>Sawing Assembling Finishing<br>and Milling and Sanding and Shipping<br>Department Department Department<br>Department Department Department<br>Manager Manager Manager<br>Manager Manager Manager<br>“T T T.<br>+ More efcient fow of work activities<br>– Can only be used with certain types of products<br>CUSTOMER DEPARTMENTALIZATION—Groups Jobs on the Basis of Specific and Unique Customers<br>Who Have Common Needs<br>Director<br>of Sales<br>Manager, Manager, Manager,<br>Retail Accounts Wholesale Accounts Government Accounts<br>ana oe<br>+ Customers’ needs and problems can be met by specialists<br>– Duplication of functions<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**Chapter 11** Organization Design **387** 

**TODAY’S VIEW** Most large organizations continue to use combinations of most or all of these types of departmentalization. For example, General Electric (GE) organizes its corporate staff along functional lines, including public relations, legal, global research, human resources, and finance. Pearson Education, publisher of this textbook, arranges its business by educational market segment (Pre K–12, higher education, and professional) and its customers (students, professors, and workplace educators), and arranges its sales function around customers and geographic regions (for example, the United States, Europe, and Asia). Black & Decker organizes its divisions along functional lines, its manufacturing units around processes, its sales around geographic regions, and its sales regions around customer groupings. We can also find similar structures in the U.S. federal government, which is organized into branches: legislative (makes law), executive (carries out laws), and judicial (evaluates laws). 

One popular departmentalization trend is the increasing use of customer departmentalization. Because getting and keeping customers is essential for success, this approach works well because it emphasizes monitoring and responding to changes in customers’ needs. Another popular trend is the use of teams, especially as work tasks have become more complex and diverse skills are needed to accomplish those tasks. One specific type of team that more organizations are using is a **cross-functional team** , a work team composed of individuals from various functional specialties. For instance, Harley-Davidson relies on cross-functional teams at all levels of the company to conceptualize and design new products. Former CEO Richard Teerlink instituted a process called “creative friction,” which was designed to ensure that multiple, sometimes conflicting perspectives are considered throughout product development.[10] We’ll discuss cross-functional teams (and all types of teams) more fully in Chapter 12. 

## cross-functional team 

A work team composed of individuals from various functional specialties 

## **Chain of Command** 

Suppose you were at work and had a problem with an issue that came up. What would you do? Who would you ask to help you resolve that issue? People need to know who their boss is. That’s what the chain of command is all about. The **chain of command** is the line of authority extending from upper organizational levels to lower levels, which clarifies who reports to whom. Managers need to consider it when organizing work because it helps employees with questions such as “Who do I report to?” or “Who do I go to if I have a problem?” To understand the chain of command, you have to understand three other important concepts: authority, responsibility, and unity of command. 

**Authority** refers to the rights inherent in a managerial position to tell people what to do and to expect them to do it.[11] The early management writers distinguished between two forms of authority: line authority and staff authority. **Line authority** entitles a manager to direct the work of an employee. It is the employer–employee authority relationship that extends from the top of the organization to the lowest echelon, according to the chain of command. As a link in the chain of command, a manager with line authority has the right to direct the work of employees and to make certain decisions without consulting anyone. 

As organizations get larger and more complex, line managers find that they do not have the time, expertise, or resources to get their jobs done effectively. In response, they create **staff authority** functions to support, assist, advise, and generally reduce some of their informational burdens. For instance, a human resource management director who cannot effectively handle managing all the activities the department needs creates a recruitment department, performance management department, and compensation and rewards department, which are staff functions. 

When managers use their authority to assign work to employees, those employees take on an obligation to perform those assigned duties. This obligation or expectation to perform is known as **responsibility** . And employees should be held accountable 

## chain of command 

The line of authority extending from upper organizational levels to the lowest levels, which clarifies who reports to whom 

## authority 

The rights inherent in a managerial position to tell people what to do and to expect them to do it 

## line authority 

Authority that entitles a manager to direct the work of an employee 

## staff authority 

Positions with some authority that have been created to support, assist, and advise those holding line authority 

## responsibility 

The obligation or expectation to perform any assigned duties 

**388** _**Part 4**_ Organizing 

## **let’s get** REAL 

## The Scenario: 

Reid Lawson is a project manager for a lighting design company in Los Angeles. He’s one of 30 project managers in the company, each with a team of 10–15 employees. Although the company’s top managers say they want employees to be “innovative” in their work, Reid and the other project managers face tightfisted control from the top. Reid’s already lost **Matt Ramos** two of his most talented designers (who went to Director of Marketing work for a competitor) because he couldn’t get 

**==> picture [7 x 63] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Source: Matt Ramos<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


approval for a project because the executive team kept nit-picking the design these two had been working on. 

**How can Reid and the other project managers get their bosses to loosen up the control? What would you suggest?** 

Losing top-notch talent is bad. Losing top-notch talent to a direct competitor is killer, especially when it’s avoidable. Reid’s first step should be an honest meeting with his boss. The evidence is fairly clear that something needs to change, so it should be a simple conversation to get the ball rolling. If that doesn’t produce results, he should turn to HR and recruiting as his biggest advocate. They almost always have the ear of the executive team. With their help, this is a very resolvable situation. 

for their performance! Assigning work authority without responsibility and accountability can create opportunities for abuse. Likewise, no one should be held responsible or accountable for work tasks over which he or she has no authority to complete those tasks. 

## unity of command 

The management principle that each person should report to only one manager 

Finally, the **unity of command** principle (one of Fayol’s 14 management principles—see page 70 in the Management History module) states that a person should report to only one manager. Without unity of command, conflicting demands from multiple bosses can occur. 

**TODAY’S VIEW** Although early management theorists (Fayol, Weber, Taylor, Barnard, and others) believed that chain of command, authority (line and staff), responsibility, and unity of command were essential, times have changed.[12] Those elements are far less important today. Information technology has made such concepts less relevant today. Employees can access information that used to be available only to managers in a matter of a few seconds. It also means that employees can communicate with anyone else in the organization without going through the chain of command. Also, many employees, especially in organizations where work revolves around projects, find themselves reporting to more than one boss, thus violating the unity of command principle. 

**Chapter 11** Organization Design **389** 

## WORKPLACE CONFIDENTIAL 

## **Coping with Multiple Bosses** 

Sue Lee was complaining about her job at a large property development company. “I work for Ted in our marketing department. But I’ve been assigned to help promote our new luxury condo project on Park Avenue. The project manager, Xu Xiang, thinks she’s my boss. She is constantly giving me things to do, priorities, and deadlines. Meanwhile, I’m getting text massages, e-mails, and phone calls from Ted with conflicting requests. I wish these two would talk to each other. I only have so many hours in my day. I can’t do two jobs at once. What do I do? Whose directives get priority? Did I mention that I spend most of my time on Xu’s project but Ted does my annual performance review?” 

Sue’s complaint is not unique. An increasing number of people are finding themselves reporting to more than one boss. In some cases, the problem is a poorly designed organization where the lines of authority aren’t clearly defined and the unity-of-command principle is broken. In other cases, especially small or family-run businesses, it can be blurred authority lines with overlapping roles. In still other cases it might be the formation of temporary teams where people report to multiple bosses. But more often, nowadays, the culprit is a matrix organization structure. As noted later in this chapter, organizations are increasingly imposing project structures on top of functional departments to better manage specific businesses, regions, or product lines. In so doing, they create overlapping responsibilities. If you find yourself in one of these situations, you very well may need to deal with bosses that have different management styles or who impose conflicting directives, vague communications, or unrealistic workloads. 

Multiple bosses can create multiple headaches but three challenges standout. First is dealing with an excessive workload. Multiple bosses often aren’t aware of what others are asking of you. Whether deliberate or not, each may treat you as if you are solely working for him or her and have no other responsibilities. So two bosses might result in your having twice the workload. With three or more bosses, of course, the problem might only increase. Second is the challenge of conflicting messages. Different bosses have different expectations and different leadership styles. What do you do when you have multiple bosses wanting you to meet their deadlines “ASAP”? Finally there is the issue of loyalty. Who do you give first priority to? Reporting to more than one person may require you to negotiate between competing demands for your time, goals, and priorities. 

So what can you do if you find yourself having to cope with multiple bosses? Here are some suggestions: 

_Prioritize your bosses._ Like it or not, you need to choose to whom your first loyalty lies. Who is more powerful and who would hurt you the least? Make sure you know who 

your ultimate boss is and make sure he or she is satisfied with your work. The person who completes your reviews and decides on your compensation is typically the person who should never be ignored. Consistent with our discussion of organizational politics in Chapter 1, you want to support your boss and, when you have more than one, give first priority to the one with the most power. 

_Be proactive about your workload_ . It’s your responsibility to make sure your multiple bosses are kept up-to-date on your workload. That includes telling each what the others have asked of you. When the load exceeds your capacity, share this information with each boss and ask for their suggestions regarding priorities. 

_Prioritize your workload and list._ Make a list of all your ongoing tasks and projects, prioritize them, and then share this list with your bosses. The list needs to be updated regularly and communicated in weekly check-in meetings. These meetings are your best opportunity to anticipate and reconcile potential conflicts. 

_Set boundaries._ Don’t be afraid to set limits. Identify how many hours you can devote to each boss’s project and how you’ve allocated priorities. If your bosses know ahead of time what the boundaries are, you can eliminate a lot of potential conflicts. 

_Get your bosses to communicate with each other_ . Get your bosses to talk with each other. Try to avoid becoming the vehicle through whom they communicate. It’s not your job to represent each boss’s agenda to the other. When there are conflicts that are directly affecting you, bring your bosses together, explain the conflicts, and encourage them to come to a resolution. 

_Look at the bright side_ . There is a positive side to multiple bosses. First, the fact that two or more bosses want you working for them says that you have valuable skills and that they trust you. Second, the complexity and ambiguity created by the absence of a single boss can allow you to expand your autonomy and influence. When you set the boundaries and define priorities, you take control over variables typically held by a boss. Finally there is the opportunity to play one boss off against another. “Like a kid playing parents off each other, ask the person who you know will give you the answer you want.” 

Based on “How to Deal with ‘Multiple Boss Madness,’” _share.com_ , February 23, 2011; A. Gallo, “Managing Multiple Bosses,” _Harvard Business Review_ (online), www.hbr.org, August 18, 2011; K. Hall, “Making the Matrix Work,” _Training Journal_ , July 2013, pp. 45-48; R. I. Sutton, _Good Boss, Bad Boss: How to Be the Best . . . and Learn from the Worst_ (New York: Business Plus, 2012); and J. Simmons, “Who’s the Boss? Answering to Multiple Bosses,” _monster.com_ , January 1, 2015. 

**390** _**Part 4**_ Organizing 

## **Exhibit 11-4** 

Contrasting Spans of Control 

**==> picture [287 x 154] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Members at Each Level<br>(Highest) Assuming Span of 4 Assuming Span of 8<br>1 1 1<br>2 4 8<br>3 16 64<br>4 64 512<br>5 256 4,096<br>6 1,024<br>7 4,096<br>(Lowest)<br>Span of 4: Span of 8:<br>Employees: = 4,096 Employees: = 4,096<br>Managers (level 1–6) = 1,365 Managers (level 1–4) =    585<br>Organizational Level<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **Span of Control** 

span of control The number of employees a manager can efficiently and effectively manage 

**==> picture [88 x 36] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
FYI<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


• The average span of control is 9.7 employees, rising as high as 11.4 employees.[13] 

How many employees can a manager efficiently and effectively manage? That’s what **span of control** is all about. The traditional view was that managers could not—and should not—directly supervise more than five or six subordinates. Determining the span of control is important because, to a large degree, it determines the number of levels and managers in an organization—an important consideration in how efficient an organization will be. All other things being equal, the wider or larger the span, the more efficient the organization. Here’s why. 

Assume two organizations both have approximately 4,100 employees. As Exhibit 11-4 shows, if one organization has a span of four and the other a span of eight, the organization with the wider span will have two fewer levels and approximately 800 fewer managers. At an average manager’s salary of $62,000 a year, the organization with the wider span would save over $49 million a year! Obviously, wider spans are more efficient in terms of cost. However, at some point, wider spans may reduce effectiveness if employee performance worsens because managers no longer have the time to lead effectively. 

**TODAY’S VIEW** The contemporary view of span of control recognizes there is no magic number. Many factors influence the number of employees a manager can efficiently and effectively manage. These factors include the skills and abilities of the manager and the employees and the characteristics of the work being done. For instance, managers with well-trained and experienced employees can function well with a wider span. Apple CEO Tim Cook has 17 direct reports. At first glance, that seems like a lot. But Cook indicates otherwise: “If you have smart people, a strong organizational culture, and a well-defined and articulated strategy that everyone understands, you can [have] numerous direct reports because your job isn’t to tell people what to do.”[14] Other contingency variables that determine the appropriate span include similarity and complexity of employee tasks; the physical proximity of subordinates; the degree to which standardized procedures are in place; the sophistication of the organization’s information system; the strength of the organization’s culture, as Cook noted; and the preferred style of the manager.[15] 

The trend in recent years has been toward larger spans of control, which is consistent with managers’ efforts to speed up decision making, increase flexibility, get closer to customers, empower employees, and reduce costs. Managers are beginning to recognize that they can handle a wider span when employees know their jobs well and when those employees understand organizational processes. Spans also take into account the nature of the work and the needs of employees. For instance, at one Nissan plant, 300 supervisors are responsible for 4,300 employees who produce thousands of vehicles daily. This span allows the supervisors time to coach individual employees on ergonomics and continuous improvement techniques.[16] 

**Chapter 11** Organization Design **391** 

## **Centralization and Decentralization** 

One of the questions that needs to be answered when organizing is “At what organizational level are decisions made?” **Centralization** is the degree to which decision making takes place at upper levels of the organization. If top managers make key decisions with little input from below, then the organization is more centralized. On the other hand, the more that lower-level employees provide input or actually make decisions, the more **decentralization** there is. Keep in mind that centralization–decentralization is not an either-or concept. The decision is relative, not absolute—that is, an organization is never completely centralized or decentralized. 

Early management writers proposed that the degree of centralization in an organization depended on the situation.[17] Their goal was the optimum and efficient use of employees. Traditional organizations were structured in a pyramid, with power and authority concentrated near the top of the organization. Given this structure, historically, centralized decisions were the most prominent, but organizations today have become more complex and responsive to dynamic changes in their environments. As such, many managers believe decisions need to be made by those individuals closest to the problems, regardless of their organizational level. In fact, the trend over the past several decades—at least in U.S. and Canadian organizations—has been a movement toward more decentralization in organizations.[18] Exhibit 11-5 lists some of the factors that affect an organization’s use of centralization or decentralization.[19] 

## centralization 

The degree to which decision making is concentrated at upper levels of the organization 

## decentralization 

The degree to which lower-level employees provide input or actually make decisions 

**==> picture [88 x 35] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
FYI<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


- 68 percent of organizations say they’ve increased centralization in the last five years.[20] 

**TODAY’S VIEW** Today, managers often choose the amount of centralization or decentralization that will allow them to best implement their decisions and achieve organizational goals.[21] What works in one organization, however, won’t necessarily work in another, so managers must determine the appropriate amount of decentralization for each organization and work units within it. 

As organizations have become more flexible and responsive to environmental trends, there’s been a distinct shift toward decentralized decision making.[22] This trend, also known as **employee empowerment** , gives employees more authority (power) to make decisions. (We’ll address this concept more thoroughly in our discussion of leadership in Chapter 16.) In large companies especially, lower-level managers are “closer to the action” and typically have more detailed knowledge about problems and how best to solve them than top managers. For instance, decentralized management is the cornerstone of Johnson & Johnson’s business model. Alex Gorsky, chairman and CEO, indicates that “our decentralized management approach acknowledges that those closest to patients and customers are in the best position to understand and address their needs.”[23] The company’s approach has paid off. It has three business divisions with 265 operating companies located across 

|**More Centralization**|**More Decentralization**|
|---|---|
|• Environment is stable.|•  Environment is complex, uncertain.|
|•  Lower-level managers are not as|•  Lower-level managers are capable and|
|capable or experienced at making|experienced at making decisions.|
|decisions as upper-level managers.||
|•  Lower-level managers do not|•  Lower-level managers want a voice in|
|want a say in decisions.|decisions.|
|•  Decisions are relatively minor.|•  Decisions are significant.|
|•  Organization is facing a crisis or|•  Corporate culture is open to allowing|
|the risk of company failure.|managers a say in what happens.|
|•  Company is large.|•  Company is geographically dispersed.|
|•  Effective implementation of|•  Effective implementation of company|
|company strategies depends|strategies depends on managers hav-|
|on managers retaining say over|ing involvement and flexibility to make|
|what happens.|decisions.|



## employee empowerment 

Giving employees more authority (power) to make decisions 

**Exhibit 11-5** Centralization or Decentralization 

**392** _**Part 4**_ Organizing 

60 countries, enabling Johnson & Johnson to serve more than one billion people per day.[24] Another example can be seen at Kellogg’s plant in Manchester, England, where more than 400 employees work in shifts around the clock to produce one million boxes of breakfast cereal every day. Despite cutbacks, this plant has successfully engaged employees and encouraged creativity to achieve its production targets.[25] 

## **Formalization** 

## formalization 

How standardized an organization’s jobs are and the extent to which employee behavior is guided by rules and procedures 

**Formalization** refers to how standardized an organization’s jobs are and the extent to which employee behavior is guided by rules and procedures. In highly formalized organizations, there are explicit job descriptions, numerous organizational rules, and clearly defined procedures covering work processes. Employees have little discretion over what’s done, when it’s done, and how it’s done. However, where there is less formalization, employees have more discretion in how they do their work. 

**TODAY’S VIEW** Although some formalization is necessary for consistency and control, many organizations today rely less on strict rules and standardization to guide and regulate employee behavior. For instance, consider the following situation: A customer came into a coffee shop to buy a cinnamon roll, but the tray was empty, prompting her to ask whether there were cinnamon rolls in the kitchen. The employee informed her that several were just removed from the tray because the sell-by date had elapsed. She strongly expressed her disappointment and became quite angry. The customer insisted that he sell her a cinnamon roll. Even though policy dictates that he should not, he did so anyway because the company has a policy of ensuring high customer satisfaction. And he reasoned that the pastry should still be good to eat because the rolls were removed just two hours before. 

Has this employee done something wrong? He did “break” the rule. But by “breaking” the rule, he actually brought in revenue and provided good customer service. 

Considering there are numerous situations where rules may be too restrictive, many organizations have allowed employees some latitude, giving them sufficient autonomy to make those decisions that they feel are best under the circumstances. It doesn’t mean throwing out all organizational rules because there _will_ be rules that are important for employees to follow—and these rules should be explained so employees understand why it’s important to adhere to them. But for other rules, employees may be given some leeway.[26] 

## MECHANISTIC **and organic structures** 

7 **LO11.2** Basic organizational design revolves around two organizational forms, described in Exhibit 11-6.[27] 

## mechanistic organization 

An organizational design that’s rigid and tightly controlled 

## **Exhibit 11-6** 

Mechanistic Versus Organic Organizations 

The **mechanistic organization** (or bureaucracy) was the natural result of combining the six elements of structure. Adhering to the chain-of-command principle ensured the existence of a formal hierarchy of authority, with each person controlled and supervised by one superior. Keeping the span of control small at increasingly higher levels in the organization created tall, impersonal structures. As the distance between the top and the bottom of the organization expanded, top management would increasingly impose rules and regulations. Because top managers couldn’t 

## **Organic** ea 

## **Mechanistic** 

   - Cross-functional teams 

- High specialization 

   - Cross-hierarchical teams 

- Rigid departmentalization 

- Clear chain of command 

   - Wide spans of control 

- Narrow spans of control 

- Centralization 

   - Decentralization 

- High formalization 

- Low formalization 

**Chapter 11** Organization Design **393** 

control lower-level activities through direct observation and ensure the use of standard practices, they substituted rules and regulations. The early management writers’ belief in a high degree of work specialization created jobs that were simple, routine, and standardized. Further specialization through the use of departmentalization increased impersonality and the need for multiple layers of management to coordinate the specialized departments.[28] 

The **organic organization** is a highly adaptive form that is as loose and flexible as the mechanistic organization is rigid and stable. Rather than having standardized jobs and regulations, the organic organization’s loose structure allows it to change rapidly, as required.[29] It has division of labor, but the jobs people do are not standardized. Employees tend to be professionals who are technically proficient and trained to handle diverse problems. They need few formal rules and little direct supervision because their training has instilled in them standards of professional conduct. For instance, a petroleum engineer doesn’t need to follow specific procedures on how to locate oil sources miles offshore. The engineer can solve most problems alone or after conferring with colleagues. Professional standards guide his or her behavior. The organic organization is low in centralization so that the professional can respond quickly to problems and because top-level managers cannot be expected to possess the expertise to make necessary decisions. 

organic organization An organizational design that’s highly adaptive and flexible 

If your professor has assigned this, go to **www.mymanagementlab.com** to watch a video titled: _Elm City Market: Organizational Structure_ and to respond to questions. 

## **Watch It 1!** 

## CONTINGENCY **factors affecting structural choice** 

m7 **LO11.3** When is a mechanistic structure preferable and when is an organic one more appropriate? Let’s look at the main contingency factors that influence the decision. 

## **Strategy and Structure** 

An organization’s structure should facilitate goal achievement. Because goals are an important part of the organization’s strategies, it’s only logical that strategy and structure are closely linked. Alfred Chandler initially researched this relationship.[30] He studied several large U.S. companies and concluded that changes in corporate strategy led to changes in an organization’s structure that support the strategy. 

Research has shown that certain structural designs work best with different organizational strategies.[31] For instance, the flexibility and free-flowing information of the organic structure works well when an organization is pursuing meaningful and unique innovations. The mechanistic organization with its efficiency, stability, and tight controls works best for companies wanting to tightly control costs. 

## **LEADER** making a **DIFFERENCE** 

As chairman and CEO of Haier Group, _**Zhang Ruimin**_ runs a successful enterprise with annual revenues of almost $30 billion, and he has turned Haier into one of China’s first global brands.[32] Zhang is considered by many to be China’s leading corporate executive. When he took over a floundering refrigerator plant in Qingdao, he quickly found out it produced terrible refrigerators. The story goes that he gave the workers sledgehammers and ordered them to destroy every one. His message: Poor quality would no longer be tolerated. Using his business training, Zhang successfully organized Haier for efficient mass production. But here in the twenty-first century, Zhang believes success requires a different competency. So he reorganized the company into self-managed groups, each devoted to a customer or group of similar customers. Zhang gets it! He understands clearly how an organization’s design can help it be successful. What can you learn from this leader making a difference? 

**394** _**Part 4**_ Organizing 

## **Size and Structure** 

There’s considerable evidence that an organization’s size affects its structure.[33] Large organizations—typically considered to be those with more than 2,000 employees—tend to have more specialization, departmentalization, centralization, and rules and regulations than do small organizations. However, once an organization grows past a certain size, size has less influence on structure. Why? Essentially, once there are around 2,000 employees, it’s already fairly mechanistic. Adding another 500 employees won’t impact the structure much. On the other hand, adding 500 employees to an organization with only 300 employees is likely to make it more mechanistic. 

3M Company’s organic structure helps it to adapt quickly to dynamic environmental forces of global competition and product innovation. With a flexible structure, 3M can satisfy customers’ fast-growing demand for touchscreen products such as Ideum’s new coffee table PC shown here that incorporates 3M’s multitouch technology, an application that is key to expanding the reach of 3M’s interactive systems and displays. Source: Ideum/REX/AP Images 

## unit production 

The production of items in units or small batches 

## mass production 

The production of items in large batches 

## process production 

The production of items in continuous processes 

## **Technology and Structure** 

Every organization uses some form of technology to convert its inputs into outputs. For instance, CloudDDM uses 3D printers to make prototypes and product parts for corporate customers. This technology has made it possible to conduct the work with few workers. According to Mitch Free, CloudDDM’s founder, “we’ll have 100 high-tech 3D printers running 24 hours, 7 days a week. And it’ll need just three employees: one for each of the eight-hour shifts.”[34] Employees at FedEx Office produce custom design and print jobs for individual customers. And employees at Bayer’s facility in Karachi, Pakistan, are involved in producing pharmaceuticals on a continuous-flow production line. 

The initial research on technology’s effect on structure can be traced to Joan Woodward, who studied small manufacturing firms in southern England to determine the extent to which structural design elements were related to organizational success.[35] She couldn’t find any consistent pattern until she divided the firms into three distinct technologies that had increasing levels of complexity and sophistication. The first category, **unit production** , described the production of items in units or small batches. The second category, **mass production** , described large-batch manufacturing. Finally, the third and most technically complex group, **process production** , included continuous-process production. A summary of her findings is shown in Exhibit 11-7. 

Other studies also have shown that organizations adapt their structures to their technology depending on how routine their technology is for transforming inputs into outputs.[36] In general, the more routine the technology, the more mechanistic the structure can be, and organizations with more nonroutine technology are more likely to have organic structures.[37] 

## **Environmental Uncertainty and Structure** 

Some organizations face stable and simple environments with little uncertainty; others face dynamic and complex environments with a lot of uncertainty. Managers try to minimize environmental uncertainty by adjusting the organization’s structure.[38] In stable and simple environments, mechanistic designs can be more effective. On the other hand, the greater the uncertainty, the more an organization needs the flexibility 

## **Exhibit 11-7** 

Woodward’s Findings on Technology and Structure 

||**Unit Production**|**Mass Production**|**Process Production**|
|---|---|---|---|
|Structural|Low vertical|Moderate vertical|High vertical|
|characteristics:|differentiation|differentiation|differentiation|
||Low horizontal|High horizontal|Low horizontal|
||differentiation|differentiation|differentiation|
||Low formalization|High formalization|Low formalization|
|Most effective|Organic|Mechanistic|Organic|
|structure:||||



**Chapter 11** Organization Design **395** 

of an organic design. For example, the uncertain nature of the commercial air travel industry means that airlines need to be flexible. Several mergers reduced the number of major airlines from nine to four. For instance, United and Continental merged in 2010 and American acquired US Airways in 2015. Combining airlines reduced the number of competitors and pressures to continually lower airfares.[39] The merged companies also were able to streamline corporate structure and operations. 

The evidence on the environment–structure relationship helps explain why so many managers today are restructuring their organizations to be lean, fast, and flexible. Worldwide economic downturns, global competition, accelerated product innovation by competitors, and increased demands from customers for high quality and faster deliveries are examples of dynamic environmental forces. Mechanistic organizations are not equipped to respond to rapid environmental change and environmental uncertainty. As a result, we’re seeing organizations become more organic. 

If your professor has assigned this, go to **www.mymanagementlab.com** to complete the _Simulation: Organizational Structure_ and get a better understanding of the challenges of designing appropriate organizational structures. 

## **Try It!** 

## TRADITIONAL **organizational design options** 

## = **LO11.4** They’re a big hit with the elementary-school crowd, and millions of 

them were sold every month. Even after decades in the automotive business, Toyota is still rethinking the way it structures its organization. The company employs more than 340,000 people worldwide and produces vehicles in plants on five continents. In the past, Toyota grouped jobs mainly according to function. Now, to speed up decision making and increase responsiveness to market trends, Toyota groups jobs according to product, such as compact car, mid-size car, commercial vehicle, or Lexus luxury vehicle. Some functions, such as research and development, serve multiple product groups.[40] In making structural decisions, managers have some common designs from which to choose. In this chapter, we’re describing the traditional organizational designs and more contemporary types of organizational designs. 

When designing a structure, managers may choose one of the traditional organizational designs. These structures tend to be more mechanistic in nature. A summary of the strengths and weaknesses of each can be found in Exhibit 11-8. 

## **Simple Structure** 

Most companies start as entrepreneurial ventures using a **simple structure** , an organizational design with little departmentalization, wide spans of control, authority centralized in a single person, and little formalization.[41] As employees are added, however, most don’t remain as simple structures. The structure tends to become more specialized and formalized. Rules and regulations are introduced, work becomes specialized, departments are created, levels of management are added, and the organization becomes increasingly bureaucratic. At this point, managers might choose a functional structure or a divisional structure. 

## simple structure 

An organizational design with little departmentalization, wide spans of control, centralized authority, and little formalization 

## **Functional Structure** 

A **functional structure** is an organizational design that groups similar or related occupational specialties together. You can think of this structure as functional departmentalization applied to the entire organization. 

## functional structure 

An organizational design that groups together similar or related occupational specialties 

## **Divisional Structure** 

The **divisional structure** is an organizational structure made up of separate business units or divisions.[42] In this structure, each division has limited autonomy, with a division manager who has authority over his or her unit and is responsible for performance. In divisional structures, however, the parent corporation typically acts as an 

## divisional structure 

An organizational structure made up of separate, semiautonomous units or divisions 

**396** _**Part 4**_ Organizing 

## **Exhibit 11-8** 

_**STRENGTHS WEAKNESSES**_ Traditional Organizational Designs a) po _**Simple**_ F ast; Not appropriate as _**Structure**_ flexible; organization grows; inexpensive to maintain; reliance on one person clear accountability. — is risky. ~~lt~~ _**Functional**_ Cost-saving advantages Pursuit of functional goals can _**Structure**_ from specialization cause managers to lose sight (economies of scale, minimal of what’s best for the overall duplication of people and Td organization; functional equipment); employees are specialists become insulated grouped with others who ae and have little understanding have similar tasks. of what other units are doing. ~~n=~~ _**Divisional**_ F ocuses on results—division Duplication of activities and _**Structure**_ managers are responsible resources increases costs and for what happens to their reduces efficiency. products and services. Fd a2. SCUCUOU _ ~~[fy]~~ external overseer to coordinate and control the various divisions, and often provides support services such as financial and legal. Walmart, for example, has two divisions: retail (Walmart Stores, International, Sam’s Clubs, and others) and support (distribution centers). 

As you’ve seen in this chapter, organizational structure and design (or redesign) are important managerial tasks. Also, we hope that you recognize that organizing decisions aren’t only important for upper-level managers. Managers at all levels may have to deal with work specialization or authority or span-of-control decisions. Later in this chapter, we’ll continue our discussion of the organizing function by looking at contemporary organizational designs. 

## ORGANIZING **for flexibility in the twenty-first century** 

Many organizations are finding that traditional organizational designs a **LO11.5** often aren’t appropriate for today’s increasingly dynamic and complex environment. Instead, organizations need to be lean, flexible, and innovative; that is, they need to be more organic. So managers are finding creative ways to structure and organize work. 

## **Team Structures** 

## team structure 

Larry Page and Sergey Brin, cofounders of Google, created a corporate structure that organized projects around “small, tightly focused teams.”[43] A **team structure** is one in which the entire organization is made up of work teams that do the organization’s work.[44] In this structure, employee empowerment is crucial because no line of 

An organizational structure in which the entire organization is made up of work teams 

**Chapter 11** Organization Design **397** 

managerial authority flows from top to bottom. Rather, employee teams design and do work in the way they think is best, but the teams are also held responsible for all work performance results in their respective areas. Google found that its best teams share five traits: psychological safety, dependability, structure and clarity, meaningful membership, and purpose.[45] 

In large organizations, the team structure complements what is typically a functional or divisional structure and allows the organization to have the efficiency of a bureaucracy _and_ the flexibility that teams provide. Companies such as Amazon, Boeing, HP, Louis Vuitton, Motorola, and Xerox, for instance, extensively use employee teams to improve productivity. 

## **Matrix and Project Structures** 

Other popular contemporary designs are the matrix and project structures. The **matrix structure** assigns specialists from different functional departments to work on projects led by a project manager. (See Exhibit 11-9.) One unique aspect of this design is that it creates a _dual chain of command_ because employees in a matrix organization have two managers, their functional area manager and their product or project manager, who share authority. The project manager has authority over the functional members who are part of 

his or her project team in areas related to the project’s goals. However, any decisions about promotions, salary recommendations, and annual reviews typically remain the functional manager’s responsibility. The matrix design “violates” the unity-of-command principle, which says that each person should report to only one boss; however, it can—and does—work effectively if both managers communicate regularly, coordinate work demands on employees, and resolve conflicts together.[46] For instance, matrix structures are common in health care settings. Physical therapists could be assigned to different programs. Some may help geriatric patients recover from hip replacement surgery. Others may work with trauma patients who have lost one or more limbs. All of the therapists report to the director of physical rehabilitation and to directors of their specialties. 

Many organizations use a **project structure** , in which employees continuously work on projects. Unlike the matrix structure, a project structure has no formal departments where employees return at the completion of a project. Instead, employees take their specific skills, abilities, and experiences to other projects. Also, all work in project structures is performed by teams of employees. For instance, at design firm IDEO, project teams form, disband, and form again as the work requires. Employees “join” 

The matrix structure is an appropriate design for the dynamic and complex environment of construction projects. Employees in a matrix design report to two bosses: a project team manager responsible for organizing and completing the project on time and within budget and a functional manager who leads the engineering, marketing, and other functional departments. 

Source: Morsa Images/DigitalVision/Getty Images 

## matrix structure 

An organizational structure that assigns specialists from different functional departments to work on one or more projects 

## project structure 

An organizational structure in which employees continuously work on projects 

## **Exhibit 11-9** 

Example of a Matrix Organization 

|R&D|Marketing<br>Customer<br>Services (CS)<br>Human<br>Resources (HR)|Marketing<br>Customer<br>Services (CS)<br>Human<br>Resources (HR)|Marketing<br>Customer<br>Services (CS)<br>Human<br>Resources (HR)|Finance|Information<br>Systems (IS)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Product 1|R&D<br>Group<br>Marketing<br>Group<br>CS<br>Group||HR<br>Group|Finance<br>Group|IS<br>Group|
|||||||
|Product 2|R&D<br>Group<br>Marketing<br>Group<br>CS<br>Group||HR<br>Group|Finance<br>Group|IS<br>Group|
|||||||
|Product 3|R&D<br>Group<br>Marketing<br>Group<br>CS<br>Group||HR<br>Group|Finance<br>Group|IS<br>Group|



**398** _**Part 4**_ Organizing 

project teams because they bring needed skills and abilities to that project. Once a project is completed, however, they move on to the next one.[47] 

Project structures tend to be more flexible organizational designs, without the departmentalization or rigid organizational hierarchy that can slow down making decisions or taking action. In this structure, managers serve as facilitators, mentors, and coaches. They eliminate or minimize organizational obstacles and ensure that teams have the resources they need to effectively and efficiently complete their work. 

## **The Boundaryless Organization** 

The Large Hadron Collider is a $6 billion particle accelerator lying in a tunnel that’s 27 kilometers (17 miles) in circumference and 175 meters (574 feet) below ground near Geneva, Switzerland. “The atom smasher is so large that a brief status report lists 2,900 authors, so complex that scientists in 34 countries have readied 100,000 computers to process its data, and so fragile that a bird dropping a bread crust can short-circuit its power supply.”[48] But exploiting the collider’s potential to expand the frontiers of knowledge has required that scientists around the world cut across “boundaries of place, organization, and technical specialty to conduct ever more ambitious experiments.” 

## boundaryless organization 

An organization whose design is not defined by, or limited to, the horizontal, vertical, or external boundaries imposed by a predefined structure 

## FYI 

- 64 percent of people said if given a choice, they’d rather work virtually than in an office.[52] 

## virtual organization 

An organization that consists of a small core of full-time employees and outside specialists temporarily hired as needed to work on projects 

**Watch It 2!** 

The structural arrangement for getting work done that has developed around the massive collider is an example of another contemporary organizational design called the **boundaryless organization** , an organization whose design is not defined by, or limited to, the horizontal, vertical, or external boundaries imposed by a predefined structure.[49] Former GE chairman Jack Welch coined the term because he wanted to eliminate vertical and horizontal boundaries within GE and break down external barriers between the company and its customers and suppliers. Although the idea of eliminating boundaries may seem odd, many of today’s most successful organizations find that they can operate most effectively by remaining flexible and _un_ structured: that the ideal structure for them is _not_ having a rigid, bounded, and predefined structure.[50] 

**VIRTUAL ORGANIZATIONS** Is an internship something you’ve ever thought about doing (or maybe have done)? How about an internship that you could do, not in a workplace cubicle, but from your couch using your computer?[51] Such virtual internships are becoming quite popular, especially with smaller and midsize companies and, of course, with online businesses. The type of work virtual interns do typically involves “researching, sales, marketing, and social media development”—tasks that can be done anywhere with a computer and online access. Some organizations are structured in a way that allows most employees to be virtual employees. 

A **virtual organization** typically consists of a small core of full-time employees and outside specialists temporarily hired as needed to work on projects.[53] An example is when Second Life, a company creating a virtual world of colorful online avatars, was building its software. Founder Philip Rosedale hired programmers from around the world and divided up the work into about 1,600 individual tasks, “from setting up databases to fixing bugs.” The process worked so well, the company used it for all sorts of work.[54] Another example is Nashville-based Emma Inc., an e-mail marketing firm with 100 employees who work from home or offices in Austin, Denver, New York, and Portland.[55] The biggest challenge they’ve faced is creating a “virtual” culture, a task made more challenging by the fact that the organization is virtual. 

If your professor has assigned this, go to **www.mymanagementlab.com** to watch a video titled: _Rudi’s Bakery: Adaptive Organizational Design_ and to respond to questions. 

**Chapter 11** Organization Design **399** 

## **F UT URE V I S I O N** 

## **Flexible Organizations** 

By 2025, a considerably smaller proportion of the labor force will hold full-time jobs. Organizations will increasingly rely on contract employees and part-timers to get the work done, giving the organization greater flexibility. Many workers will be doing pieces of what is today a single job. From the employee’s standpoint, it will mean greater individual control of the employee’s future rather than being dependent on a single employer. 

“Headquarter” cities such as New York, Toronto, or London will find themselves with lots of empty office space. Conversely, job opportunities will be geographically dispersed, and in many cases, not dependent at all on where employees reside. An increasing proportion of the labor force will work from home. And many organizations will create regional satellite centers where employees meet or work. These centers will be less costly to operate than centralized offices and will cut down on commuting distances for workers. 

Future workers will be more like outside consultants than full-time employees. Assignments will be temporary. They might last a few weeks or a few years, but the presumption is—on the part of both workers and employers—that the relationship will not become permanent. As such, you will find yourself consistently working on new projects with a different group of coworkers. 

_If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to_ _**www.mymanagementlab.com** to discuss the following questions._ 

**TALK ABOUT IT 1:** What are the challenges of “flexibility” for organizations and managers? For workers? 

Additionally, expect to see fewer large corporate headquarter buildings and centralized corporate centers. Work demands will not require organizations to house large numbers of workers in one place. 

**TALK ABOUT IT 2:** What about you? How do you feel about working like this? 

**TASK FORCES** Another structural option organizations might use is a **task force** (also called an **ad hoc committee** ), a temporary committee or team formed to tackle a specific short-term problem affecting several departments. The temporary nature of a task force is what differentiates it from a cross-functional team. Task force members usually perform many of their normal work tasks while serving on the task force; however, the members of a task force must collaborate to resolve the issue that’s been assigned to them. When the issue or problem is solved, the task force is no longer needed and members return to their regular assignments. Many organizations, from government agencies to universities to businesses, use task forces. For instance, at San Francisco–based accounting firm Eichstaedt & Devereaux, employee task forces have helped develop formal recruiting, mentoring, and training programs. And at FritoLay, a subsidiary of PepsiCo, Inc., a task force that included members of the company’s Hispanic employees’ resource group helped in the development of two products: Lay’s Cool Guacamole potato chips and Doritos Guacamole tortilla chips.[56] 

The days may be numbered when businesses generate their own product development ideas and develop, manufacture, market, and deliver those products to customers. Today, many companies are trying **open innovation** , opening up the search for new ideas beyond the organization’s boundaries and allowing innovations to easily transfer inward and outward. For instance, Under Armour, a sports shoes and sportswear company, created the Idea House, which is an online platform available to employees and the public. Anyone may submit an idea for a new product or product improvement. The Idea House has been a worthwhile investment because it led to important innovations; for example, the Recharge[®] compression suit that helps muscles recover more quickly after strenuous physical activities. 

task force (or ad hoc committee) A temporary committee or team formed to tackle a specific short-term problem affecting several departments 

## open innovation 

Opening up the search for new ideas beyond the organization’s boundaries and allowing innovations to easily transfer inward and outward 

As you can see, many of today’s successful companies are collaborating directly with customers in the product development process. Others are partnering with suppliers, other outsiders, and even competitors. Exhibit 11-10 describes some of the benefits and drawbacks of open innovation. 

**400** _**Part 4**_ Organizing 

## **Exhibit 11-10** 

## Benefits and Drawbacks of Open Innovation 

Sources: Based on S. Lindegaard, “The Side Effects of Open Innovation,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek online, June 7, 2010; H. W. Chesbrough and A. R. Garman, “How Open Innovation Can Help You Cope in Lean Times,” Harvard Business Review, December 2009, pp. 68–76; A. Gabor, “The Promise [and Perils] of Open Collaboration,” Strategy & Business online, Autumn 2009; and J. Winsor, “Crowdsourcing: What It Means for Innovation,” BusinessWeek online, June 15, 2009. 

## 

- Gives customers what they want—a voice 

- Allows organizations to respond to complex problems 

      - _**Drawbacks**_ 

      - High demands of managing the process 

   - Nurtures internal and external relationships 

- . Brings focus back to a Extensive support 

- marketplace needed 

- - Provides way to cope P| Cultural challenges 

- with rising costs and uncertainties of product | Greater need for development flexibility 

      - Crucial changes required in how knowledge is controlled and shared 

## **Telecommuting** 

Xerox Corporation has more than 8,000 employees—11 percent of its workforce— who work from home full-time in a wide variety of jobs including customer care, technical support, quality control, and software development. Xerox believes that telecommuting opportunities result in higher employee productivity and increased morale and job satisfaction. Source: Bloomberg/Getty Images 

## telecommuting 

A work arrangement in which employees work at home and are linked to the workplace by computer 

Eve Gelb used to endure hour-and-a-half commutes morning and evening on the 405 freeway in Los Angeles to her job as a project manager at SCAN Health Plan.[57] Now, she’s turned her garage into an office and works from home as a telecommuter. On the days when she does have to go in to the corporate office, she shares a space with her three subordinates who also work flexibly. Information technology has made telecommuting possible, and external environmental changes have made it necessary for many organizations. **Telecommuting** is a work arrangement in which employees work at home and are linked to the workplace by computer. Needless to say, not every job is a candidate for telecommuting, but many are. 

Working from home used to be considered a “cushy perk” for a few lucky employees, and such an arrangement wasn’t allowed very often. Now, many businesses view telecommuting as a business necessity. For instance, at Avnet, Inc., the company’s chief executive officer said that he favors telecommuting because it can improve employee engagement. Also, SCAN Health Plan’s chief financial officer said that getting more employees to telecommute provided the company a way to grow without having to incur any additional fixed costs such as office buildings, equipment, or parking lots. In addition, some companies view the arrangement as a way to combat high gas prices and to attract talented employees who want more freedom and control over their work. 

**Chapter 11** Organization Design **401** 

Despite its apparent appeal, many managers are reluctant to have their employees become “laptop hobos.”[59] They argue that employees will waste time surfing the Internet or playing online games instead of working, that they’ll ignore clients, and that they’ll desperately miss the camaraderie and social exchanges of the workplace. In addition, managers wonder how they’ll “manage” these employees. How do you interact with an employee and gain his or her trust when they’re not physically present? And what if their work performance isn’t up to par? How do you make suggestions for improvement? Another significant challenge is making sure that company information is kept safe and secure when employees are working from home. 

## FYI 

• 82 percent of employers offer telecommuting work arrangements.[58] 

Employees often express the same concerns about working remotely, especially when it comes to the isolation of not being “at work.” At Accenture, where employees are scattered around the world, the chief human resources officer says it isn’t easy to maintain that esprit de corps.[60] However, the company has put in place a number of programs and processes to create that sense of belonging for its workforce, including Web-conferencing tools, assigning each employee to a career counselor, and holding quarterly community events at its offices. In addition, the telecommuter employee may find that the line between work and home becomes even more blurred, which can be stressful.[61] Finally, many women believe that taking advantage of flexible work arrangements may stunt career advancement. Managers and organizations must address these important organizing issues as they move toward having employees telecommute. For instance, Moody’s Corporation uses its intranet to showcase women who advanced to executive positions. One woman was promoted to senior vice president after telecommuting two days a week for many years.[62] 

_**Staying Connected Knowledge**_ —If your instructor is using Pearson MyLab Management, log onto **mymanagementlab.com** and test your _staying connected knowledge_ . **Be sure to refer back to the chapter opener!** 

## **It’s Your Career** 

> **let’s get** REAL The Scenario: Isabella Castillo, vice president of professional services at a consulting company that helps IT organizations deliver better service to their customers, needs help with her **Justin Kidwell** professional staff of 16 consultants, who all work from home. Her problem: dealing Management Consultant with the realities of telecommuting—lack of direct interaction, lack of camaraderie, feeling isolated and outof-the-loop, etc. For their type of business, remote work makes good business sense, but how can she connect and engage her employees? **What advice would you give Isabella?** I would focus on a few things: 1. Making people development a strategic goal 2. Semiannual retreats 3. Leveraging technology Embedding people development into the performance measurement equation ensures interaction and teaming. The semiannual retreats provide a bonding environment and opportunity to gain buy-in to management priorities. Collaborative tools make phone-only meetings obsolete. 

**402** _**Part 4**_ Organizing 

## **Compressed Workweeks, Flextime, and Job Sharing** 

During the global economic crisis in the United Kingdom, accounting firm KPMG needed to reduce costs. It decided to use flexible work options as a way of doing so. The company’s program, called Flexible Futures, offered employees four options to choose from: a four-day workweek with a 20 percent salary reduction; a two- to twelve-week sabbatical at 30 percent of pay; both options; or continue with their regular schedule. Some 85 percent of the U.K. employees agreed to the reduced-workweek plan. “Since so many people agreed to the flexible work plans, KPMG was able to cap the salary cut at about 10 percent for the year in most cases.” The best thing, though, was that as a result of the plan, KPMG didn’t have to do large-scale employee layoffs.[63] 

Flexible work arrangements accommodate employees’ needs and desires to achieve a balance between their work lives and personal lives. For example, work options such as compressed workweeks, flextime, and job sharing give parents the opportunity to spend time during the day with their children. Source: Iakov Filimonov/Shutterstock 

compressed workweek A workweek where employees work longer hours per day but fewer days per week 

flextime (or flexible work hours) A scheduling system in which employees are required to work a specific number of hours a week but are free to vary those hours within certain limits 

## job sharing 

The practice of having two or more people split a full-time job 

## FYI 

- 47 percent of employees say that asking for flexible work options would hurt their career advancement.[70] 

As this example shows, organizations may sometimes find they need to restructure work using forms of flexible work arrangements. One approach is a **compressed workweek** , a workweek where employees work longer hours per day but fewer days per week. The most common arrangement is four 10-hour days (a 4–40 program). For example, in Utah, state employees have a mandated (by law) four-day workweek, with offices closed on Fridays in an effort to reduce energy costs. After a year’s time, the state found that its compressed workweek resulted in a 13 percent reduction in energy use and estimated that state employees saved as much as $6 million in gasoline costs.[64] And the accounting/consulting firm, KPMG, permits some U.S. employees to select a compressed workweek option. Barbara Wankoff, KPMG’s director of workplace solutions, said: “Their satisfaction goes way up when they have control over their time. And it increases employee morale and productivity and retention.”[65] Another alternative is **flextime** (also known as **flexible work hours** ), a scheduling system in which employees are required to work a specific number of hours a week but are free to vary those hours within certain limits. A flextime schedule typically designates certain common core hours when all employees are required to be on the job, but allows starting, ending, and lunch-hour times to be flexible. According to a survey of companies by the Families and Work Institute, 81 percent of the respondents now offer flextime benefits.[66] Another survey by Watson Wyatt of mid- and large-sized companies found that a flexible work schedule was the most commonly offered benefit.[67] 

In Great Britain, McDonald’s experimented with an unusual program—dubbed the Family Contract—to reduce absenteeism and turnover at some of its restaurants. Under this Family Contract, employees from the same immediate family can fill in for one another for any work shift without having to clear it first with their manager.[68] This type of job scheduling is called **job sharing** —the practice of having two or more people split a full-time job. Although something like McDonald’s Family Contract may be appropriate for a low-skilled job, other organizations might offer job sharing to professionals who want to work but don’t want the demands and hassles of a fulltime position. For instance, at Ernst & Young and Google, employees in many of the company’s locations can choose from a variety of flexible work arrangements, including job sharing. Also, many companies have used job sharing during the economic downturn to avoid employee layoffs.[69] 

## **The Contingent Workforce** 

Around the world, many organizations are coping with labor shortages and peak work demands by hiring employees on a temporary or part-time basis. Top managers at Toyota, for example, understand the need to have valuable skills and technical know-how available within the organization, even as their workforce ages. Toyota’s factories frequently hire contract workers but also retain a number as permanent, 

**Chapter 11** Organization Design **403** 

full-time employees to enhance the workforce’s capabilities—and to keep production going when more experienced employees help out on projects at other Toyota factories.[71] According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, **contingent workers** are persons who do not expect their jobs to last or who reported that their jobs are temporary. Also, they do not have an implicit or explicit contract for ongoing employment. Alternative employment arrangements include persons employed as independent contractors, on-call workers, temporary help agency workers, and workers provided by contract firms. Aramark is an example of a contract organization. It provides food service, facilities and uniform services to hospitals, universities, and other businesses. For instance, most food service workers in a hospital’s cafeteria are employees of the contract company, not the hospital. 

## contingent workers 

Temporary, freelance, or contract workers whose employment is contingent on demand for their services 

“Companies are starting to rethink the way they get work done.”[72] As full-time jobs are eliminated through downsizing and other organizational restructurings, managers often rely on a contingent workforce to fill in as needed. A recent survey of top executives revealed that a majority of companies from a variety of industries are engaging contingent workers. For example, 81 percent of organizations in the health care industry use contingent workers.[73] And one of the top-ranking forecasts in a survey that asked HR experts to look ahead to 2018 was that “firms will become adept at sourcing and engaging transient talent around short-term needs, and will focus considerable energy on the long-term retention of smaller core talent groups.”[74] The model for the contingent worker structural approach can be seen in the film industry. There, people are essentially “free agents” who move from project to project applying their skills—directing, talent casting, costuming, makeup, set design, and so forth—as needed. They assemble for a movie, then disband once it’s finished and move on to the next project. This type of contingent worker is common in project organizations. But contingent workers can also be temporary employees brought in to help with special needs such as seasonal work. Let’s look at some of the organizational issues associated with contingent workers. 

One of the main issues businesses face with their contingent workers, especially those who are independent contractors or freelancers, is classifying who actually qualifies as one.[75] The decision on who is and who isn’t an independent contractor isn’t as easy or as unimportant as it may seem. Companies don’t have to pay Social Security, Medicare, or unemployment insurance taxes on workers classified as independent contractors. And those individuals also aren’t covered by most workplace laws. So it’s an important decision. For instance, Uber Technologies, Inc., treats some 450,000 of its drivers as contractors. Their classification of these workers as independent contractors has caused battles in the courts. Uber drivers claim that they should be treated as employees because the company controls their work, sets compensation, and imposes vehicle standards. To the drivers’ dismay, a court ruled that Uber drivers in California and Massachusetts are independent contractors. The legal definition of a contract worker depends on how much control a company has over the person; that is, does the company control what the worker does and how the worker does his or her job? When a company has more control, the individual is more likely to be considered an employee, not an independent contractor, but not always, as the recent court ruling conveys. And it isn’t just the legal/tax issues that are important in how workers are classified. The structural implications, especially in terms of getting work done and how performance problems are resolved, are important as well. In the Uber case, the court ruled that the company must explain its decisions to terminate drivers and provide warnings first. 

If your professor has assigned this, go to **www.mymanagementlab.com** to complete the Writing Assignment _MGMT 2: Organizational Structures._ 

**Write It!** 

**404** _**Part 4**_ Organizing 

## Chapter 11 

## **PREPARING FOR: Exams/Quizzes** 

## CHAPTER SUMMARY **by Learning Objectives** 

## **LO11.1** 

## DESCRIBE six key elements in organizational design. 

The key elements in organizational design are work specialization, departmentalization, chain of command, span of control, centralization–decentralization, and formalization. Work specialization is dividing work activities into separate job tasks. Today’s view is that work specialization can help employees be more efficient. Departmentalization is how jobs are grouped together. Today most large organizations use combinations of different forms of departmentalization. The chain of command and its companion concepts—authority, responsibility, and unity of command—were viewed as important ways of maintaining control in organizations. The contemporary view is that they are less relevant in today’s organizations. The traditional view of span of control was that managers should directly supervise no more than five to six individuals. The contemporary view is that the span of control depends on the skills and abilities of the manager and the employees and on the characteristics of the situation. Centralization–decentralization is a structural decision about who makes decisions— upper-level managers or lower-level employees. Formalization concerns the organization’s use of standardization and strict rules to provide consistency and control. Today, organizations rely less on strict rules and standardization to guide and regulate employee behavior. 

## **LO11.2** 

## CONTRAST mechanistic and organic structures. 

A mechanistic organization is a rigid and tightly controlled structure. An organic organization is highly adaptive and flexible. 

## **LO11.3** 

## DISCUSS the contingency factors that favor either the 

## mechanistic model or the organic model of organizational design. 

An organization’s structure should support the strategy. If the strategy changes, the structure also should change. An organization’s size can affect its structure up to a certain point. Once an organization reaches a certain size (usually around 2,000 employees), it’s fairly mechanistic. An organization’s technology can affect its structure. An organic structure is most effective with unit production and process production technology. A mechanistic structure is most effective with mass production technology. The more uncertain an organization’s environment, the more it needs the flexibility of an organic design. 

## **LO11.4** 

## DESCRIBE traditional organizational design options. 

A simple structure is one with little departmentalization, wide spans of control, authority centralized in a single person, and little formalization. A functional structure groups similar or related occupational specialties together. A divisional structure is made up of separate business units or divisions. 

## **LO11.5** 

## DISCUSS 

In a team structure, the entire organization is made up of work teams. The matrix structure assigns specialists from different functional departments to work on one or more projects being led by project managers. A project structure is one in which employees continuously work on projects. A boundaryless organization’s design is not defined by, or limited by, the horizontal, vertical, or external boundaries imposed by a predefined structure. A virtual organization consists of a small core of full-time 

**Chapter 11** Organization Design **405** 

employees and outside specialists temporarily hired as needed to work on projects. Another structural option is a task force, which is a temporary committee or team formed to tackle a specific short-term problem affecting several departments. 

Telecommuting is a work arrangement in which employees work at home and are linked to the workplace by computer. A compressed workweek is one in which employees work longer hours per day but fewer days per week. Flextime is a scheduling system in which employees are required to work a specific number of hours a week but are free to vary those hours within certain limits. Job sharing is when two or more people split a full-time job. 

Contingent workers are temporary, freelance, or contract workers whose employment is contingent on demand for their services. Organizing issues include classifying who actually qualifies as an independent contractor; setting up a process for recruiting, screening, and placing contingent workers; and having a method in place for establishing goals, schedules, and deadlines and for monitoring work performance. 

## Pearson MyLab Management 

Go to **mymanagementlab.com** to complete the problems marked with this icon . 

## REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 

- 11-1. Any organizational design has traditionally had a chain of command. How does a chain of command work? 

- 11-2. Contrast mechanistic and organic organizations. 

- 11-3. Discuss why you think an organization might be keen to increase its managers’ span of control. 

- 11-4. Why is structure important? Why does an organization need a clear structure? Are there any other reasons for organizational structures beyond the formal arrangement of jobs, roles, and responsibilities? 

- 11-5. In terms of organizational designs, what is a simple structure? 

- 11-6. There is evidence that an organization’s size will affect its structure. The larger the number of employees, the more mechanistic the organization will tend to become. Can this problem be overcome? 

- 11-7. An organization’s structure is dictated by its organizational strategy. Which structural design is best if a manufacturing company’s goal is to keep costs low as a competitive advantage? 

- 11-8. What are the main challenges facing organizational designs today? 

## Pearson MyLab Management 

If your professor has assigned these, go to **mymanagementlab.com** for the following Assisted-graded writing questions: 

- **11-9.** Can an organization’s structure be changed quickly? Why or why not? Should it be changed quickly? Explain. 

- **11-10.** The gradual move toward more flexible working practices will radically change the way organizations operate. Do you agree or disagree? Explain your answer. 

**406** _**Part 4**_ Organizing 

## **PREPARING FOR: My Career** ~~a~~ 

## PERSONAL ° PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS P I A INVENTORY ASSESSMENT OO) 

## **Organizational Structure Assessment** 

As this chapter described, there are many different approaches to designing organizational structure. What 

type of structure appeals to you? Take this PIA and find out. 

## a) 

## a) ETHICS DILEMMA 

Thomas Lopez, a lifeguard in the Miami area, was fired for leaving his assigned area to save a drowning man.[76] His employer, Jeff Ellis and Associates, which has a contract with the Florida city of Hallandale, said that by leaving his assigned patrol area uncovered, Lopez opened the company up to possible legal action. Lopez said he had no choice but to do what he did. He wasn’t putting his job rules first over helping someone who desperately needed help. “I’m going 

to do what I felt was right, and I did.” After this story hit the media, the company offered Lopez his job back, but he declined. 

- 11-11.  What do you think? What ethical concerns do you see in this situation? 

- 11-12.  What lessons can be applied to organizational design from this story? 

## SKILLS EXERCISE **Developing Your Acquiring Power Skill** 

## **About the Skill** 

Power is a natural process in any group or organization, and to perform their jobs effectively, managers need to know how to acquire and use power.[77] Why is having power important? Because power makes you less dependent on others. When a manager has power, he or she is not as dependent on others for critical resources. And if the resources a manager controls are important, scarce, and nonsubstitutable, her power will increase because others will be more dependent on her for those resources. (See Chapter 16 for more information on leader power.) 

## **Steps in Practicing the Skill** 

You can be more effective at acquiring and using power if you use the following eight behaviors. 

- _**Frame arguments in terms of organizational goals.**_ To be effective at acquiring power means camouflaging your self-interest. Discussions over who controls what resources should be framed in terms of the benefits that will accrue to the organization; do not point out how you personally will benefit. 

- _**Develop the right image.**_ If you know your organization’s culture, you already understand what the organization wants and values from its employees in terms of dress, associates to cultivate and those to avoid, whether to appear risk taking or risk aversive, the preferred leadership style, the importance placed on getting along well with others, and so forth. With this knowledge, 

you’re equipped to project the appropriate image. Because the assessment of your performance isn’t always a fully objective process, you need to pay attention to style as well as substance. 

- _**Gain control of organizational resources.**_ Controlling organizational resources that are scarce _and_ important is a source of power. Knowledge and expertise are particularly effective resources to control. They make you more valuable to the organization and therefore more likely to have job security, chances for advancement, and a receptive audience for your ideas. 

- _**Make yourself appear indispensable.**_ Because we’re dealing with appearances rather than objective facts, you can enhance your power by appearing to be indispensable. You don’t really have _to be_ indispensable, as long as key people in the organization believe that you are. 

- _**Be visible.**_ If you have a job that brings your accomplishments to the attention of others, that’s great. However, if you don’t have such a job, you’ll want to find ways to let others in the organization know what you’re doing by highlighting successes in routine reports, having satisfied customers relay their appreciation to senior executives, being seen at social functions, being active in your professional associations, and developing powerful allies who speak positively about your accomplishments. Of course, you’ll want to be on the lookout for those projects that will increase your visibility. 

**Chapter 11** Organization Design **407** 

- _**Develop powerful allies.**_ To get power, it helps to have powerful people on your side. Cultivate contacts with potentially influential people above you, at your own level, and at lower organizational levels. These allies often can provide you with information that’s otherwise not readily available. In addition, having allies can provide you with a coalition of support—if and when you need it. 

- _**Avoid “tainted” members.**_ In almost every organization, there are fringe members whose status is questionable. Their performance and/or loyalty may be suspect. Keep your distance from such individuals. 

- _**Support your boss.**_ Your immediate future is in the hands of your current boss. Because he or she evaluates your performance, you’ll typically want to do whatever is necessary to have your boss on your side. You should make every effort to help your boss succeed, make her look good, support her if she is under siege, and spend the time to find out the criteria she will use to assess your 

effectiveness. Don’t undermine your boss. And don’t speak negatively of her to others. 

## **Practicing the Skill** 

The following suggestions are activities you can do to practice the behaviors associated with acquiring power. 

**1.** Keep a one-week journal of your behavior describing incidences when you tried to influence others around you. Assess each incident by asking: Were you successful at these attempts to influence them? Why or why not? What could you have done differently? 

**2.** Review recent issues of a business periodical (such as _Bloomberg BusinessWeek, Fortune, Forbes, Fast Company, Industry Week,_ or _The Wall Street Journal_ ). Look for articles on reorganizations, promotions, or departures from management positions. Find at least two articles where you believe power issues are involved. Relate the content of the articles to the concepts introduced in this skill module. 

## WORKING TOGETHER **Team Exercise** 

Businesses need to be adaptable and available on a 24-hour basis. Working in groups of three or four, discuss how you would organize a small workforce such that it is able to respond on a 24-hour basis, all year round. The workforce will be centrally located. You need to be able to make 

accommodations for employees with external commitments. You are required to offer flexible working, job sharing, or compressed working packages. As a group, draft guidelines for the management and other employees. Be prepared to share your group’s suggestions with the rest of the class. 

## MY TURN TO BE A MANAGER 

- Find three different examples of an organizational chart. (A company’s annual reports are a good place to look.) In a report, describe each of these. Try to decipher the organization’s use of organizational design elements, especially departmentalization, chain of command, centralization-decentralization, and formalization. 

- Survey at least 10 different managers as to how many employees they supervise. Also ask them whether they feel they could supervise more employees or whether they feel the number they supervise is too many. Graph your survey results and write a report describing what you found. Draw some conclusions about span of control. 

- Using current business periodicals, research open innovation efforts by companies. Choose three examples of businesses using this and describe and evaluate what each is doing. 

- Visit the When Work Works website at www. whenworkworks.org. This organization works to bring research on workplace flexibility into practice. Visit the “Find Solutions” page of the website and review the guidance provided for employers. What resources are available for managers looking to create more flexible work arrangements? 

**408** _**Part 4**_ Organizing 

## CASE APPLICATION 

## A New Kind of Structure **1** 

Admit it. Sometimes the projects you’re working on (school, work, or both) can get pretty boring and monotonous. Wouldn’t it be great to have a magic button you could push to get someone else to do that boring, time-consuming stuff? At Pfizer, that “magic button” is a reality for a large number of employees.[78] 

As a global pharmaceutical company, Pfizer is continually looking for ways to help employees be more efficient and effective. The company’s senior director of organizational effectiveness found that the highly educated MBAs it hired to “develop strategies and innovate were instead Googling and making PowerPoints.”[79] Indeed, internal studies conducted to find out just how much time its valuable talent was spending on menial tasks was startling. The average Pfizer employee was spending 20 percent to 40 percent of his or her time on support work (creating documents, typing notes, doing research, manipulating data, scheduling meetings) and only 60 percent to 80 percent on knowledge work (strategy, innovation, networking, collaborating, critical thinking). And the problem wasn’t just at lower levels. Even the highest-level employees were affected. Take, for instance, David Cain, an executive director for global engineering. He enjoys his job—assessing environmental real estate risks, managing facilities, and controlling a multimillion-dollar budget. But he didn’t so much enjoy having to go through spreadsheets and put together PowerPoints. Now, however, with Pfizer’s “magic button,” those tasks are passed off to individuals outside the organization. 

Just what is this “magic button”? Originally called the Office of the Future (OOF), the renamed PfizerWorks allows employees to shift tedious and time-consuming tasks with the click of a single button on their computer desktop. They describe what they need on an online form, which is then sent to one of two Indian service-outsourcing firms. When a request is received, a team member in India calls the Pfizer employee to clarify what’s needed and by when. The team member then e-mails back a cost specification for the requested work. If the Pfizer employee decides to proceed, the costs involved are charged to the employee’s department. About this unique arrangement, Cain said that he relishes working with what he prefers to call his “personal consulting organization.” 

The number 66,500 illustrates just how beneficial PfizerWorks has been for the company. That’s the number of work hours estimated to have been saved by employees who’ve used PfizerWorks. What about David Cain’s experiences? When he gave the Indian team a complex project researching strategic actions that worked when consolidating company facilities, the team put the report together in a month, something that would have taken him six months to do alone. “Pfizer pays me not to work tactically, but to work strategically,” he says.[80] 

## o **DISCUSSION QUESTIONS** 

- 11-13.  Describe and evaluate what Pfizer is doing with its PfizerWorks. 

- 11-14.  What structural implications—good and bad—does this approach have? (Think in terms of the six organizational design elements.) 

- 11-15.  Do you think this arrangement would work for other types of organizations? Why or why not? What types of organizations might it also work for? 

- 11-16.  What role do you think organizational structure plays in an organization’s efficiency and effectiveness? Explain. 

**Chapter 11** Organization Design **409** 

## CASE APPLICATION **2** Organizational Volunteers 

They’re individuals you might never have thought of as being part of an organization’s structure, but for many organizations, volunteers provide a much-needed source of labor.[81] Maybe you’ve volunteered at a Habitat for Humanity build, a homeless shelter, or some other nonprofit organization. However, would you consider a volunteer assignment at a for-profit business? Many large corporations and start-up companies are relying on the willingness of enthusiastic product users to voluntarily help other users with questions about products or services via online discussion boards. Some suggest that this movement will transform the field of customer service, using fewer paid employees and more volunteers to respond to technical questions such as how to program a new high-definition television or set up an Internet home network. 

Self check-outs. Self check-ins. Self order-placing. Pumping your own gas (although most of you are probably too young to remember having an attendant who pumped your gas, checked your oil, and washed your windshield). Filling out online forms. Businesses have become very good at getting customers to do free work. Now, they’re taking the concept even further, especially in customer service settings, by getting “volunteers” to perform specialized work tasks. 

The role that these volunteer “enthusiasts” have played, especially in contributing innovations to research and development efforts, has been closely researched in recent years. For example, case studies highlight the product tweaks made by early skateboarders and mountain bikers to their gear. Researchers have also studied the programmers behind open-source software like the Linux operating system. It seems that individuals who do this type of “volunteering” are motivated mainly by a payoff in enjoyment and respect among their peers and to some extent the skills they’re able to develop. Now, as the concept of individuals volunteering for work tasks moves to the realm of customer service, can it work and what does it mean for managers? 

For instance, at Verizon’s high-speed fiber optic Internet, television, and telephone service, “volunteers” are answering customer questions about technical matters on a company-sponsored customer-service website for no pay. Mark Studness, director of Verizon’s e-commerce unit, was familiar with sites where users offered tips and answered questions. His challenge? Find a way to use that potential resource for customer service. His solution? “Super,” or lead, users—that is, users who provided the best answers and dialogue in Web forums. 

The experiment at Verizon seems to be working well and these online “volunteers” can be an important addition to a company’s customer service efforts. Studness says that creating an atmosphere that these super users find desirable is a key consideration because without that, you have nothing. A company that worked with Verizon to set up its structure said that these super or lead users are driven by the same online challenges and aspects as fervent gamers are. So they set up the structure with an elaborate rating system for contributors with ranks, badges, and “kudos counts.” So far, Studness is happy with how it’s gone. He says the companysponsored customer-service site has been extremely useful and cost efficient in redirecting thousands of questions that would have been answered by staff at a Verizon call center. 

## **DISCUSSION QUESTIONS** 

- 11-17.  What do you think about using “volunteers” to do work that other people get paid to do? 

- 11-18.  If you were in Mark Studness’s position, what would you be most concerned about in this arrangement? How would you “manage” that concern? 

**410** _**Part 4**_ Organizing 

- 11-19.  How do these “volunteers” fit into an organization’s structure? Take each of the six elements of organizational design and discuss how each would affect this structural approach. 

- 11-20.  Do you think this approach could work for other types of work being done or in other types of organizations? Explain. 

## ENDNOTES 

1. A. R. Carey and P. Trap, “Fewer Hours at the Office,” _USA Today,_ October 17, 2013, p. 1A. 

2. “The Simple List,” _Real Simple,_ September 2013, p. 14. 

3. Ibid. 

4. C. Sloan, “787 Program: Delivery & Dispatch Reliability Catching Up with Demand,” _Airways News_ online, www. airwaysnews.com, June 29, 2015. 

5. G. Polek, “After Record Ramp-Up, Boeing Fine-Tunes 787 Production,” _Aviation International News_ online, www. ainonline.com, June 11, 2015. 

6. D. Hudepohl, “Finesse a Flexible Work Schedule,” _Wall Street Journal,_ February 19, 2008, p. B8. 

7. J. Nickerson, C. J. Yen, and J. T. Mahoney, “Exploring the Problem-Finding and Problem-Solving Approach for Designing Organizations,” _Academy of Management Perspectives,_ February 2012, pp. 52–72; R. Greenwood and D. Miller, “Tackling Design Anew: Getting Back to the Heart of Organizational Theory,” _Academy of Management Perspectives,_ November 2010, pp. 78–89. 

8. See, for example, R. L. Daft, _Organization Theory and Design_ , 10th ed. (Mason, OH: South-Western College Publishing, 2009). 

9. C. Dougherty, “Workforce Productivity Falls,” _Wall Street Journal,_ May 4, 2012, p. A5; and S. E. Humphrey, J. D. Nahrgang, and F. P. Morgeson, “Integrating Motivational, Social, and Contextual Work Design Features: A MetaAnalytic Summary and Theoretical Expansion of the Work Design Literature,” _Journal of Applied Psychology,_ September 2007, pp. 1332–1356. 

10. A. J. Ward, M. J. Lankau, A. C. Amason, J. A. Sonnenfeld, and B. R. Agle, “Improving the Performance of Top Management Teams,” _MIT Sloan Management Review_ online, www.sloanreview.mit.edu, April 1, 2007. 

11. For a discussion of authority, see W. A. Kahn and K. E. Kram, “Authority at Work: Internal Models and Their Organizational Consequences,” _Academy of Management Review_ , January 1994, pp. 17–50. 

12. R. Ashkenas, “Simplicity-Minded Management,” _Harvard Business Review,_ December 2007, pp. 101–109; and P. Glader, “It’s Not Easy Being Lean,” _Wall Street Journal,_ June 19, 2006, pp. B1+. 

13. “Global Human Capital Trends 2016–The New Organization: Different by Design,” _Deloitte University_ Press, www.deloitte. com, 2016. 

14. S. Lebowitz, “Apple CEO Tim Cook Now Has 17 Direct Reports––and That’s Probably Too Many,” Business Insider online, www.businessinsider.com, July 8, 2015. 

15. G. L. Neilson and J. Wulf, “How Many Direct Reports?,” _Harvard Business Review,_ April 2012, pp. 112–119; and D. Van Fleet, “Span of Management Research and Issues,” _Academy of Management Journal_ , September 1983, pp. 546–552. 

16. Chris Tighe, “Nissan Builds on Loyalty at Sunderland Plant,” _Financial Times,_ March 7, 2016, https://www.ft.com/ content/7487772a-d703-11e5-829b-8564e7528e54 (accessed December 23, 2016). 

17. H. Fayol, _General and Industrial Management_ , trans. C. Storrs (London: Pitman Publishing, 1949), pp. 19–42. 

18. J. Zabojnik, “Centralized and Decentralized Decision Making in Organizations,” _Journal of Labor Economics,_ January 2002, pp. 1–22. 

19. See, for example, H. Mintzberg, _Power In and Around Organizations_ (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1983); and J. Child, _Organization: A Guide to Problems and Practices_ (London: Kaiser & Row, 1984). 

20. M. Weinstein, “It’s a Balancing Act,” _Training,_ May 2009, p. 10. 

21. See P. Kenis and D. Knoke, “How Organizational Field Networks Shape Interorganizational Tie-Formation Rates,” _Academy of Management Review,_ April 2002, pp. 275–293. 

22. A. D. Amar, C. Hentrich, and V. Hlupic, “To Be a Better Leader, Give Up Authority,” _Harvard Business Review,_ December 2009, pp. 22–24. 

23. Johnson & Johnson, _Annual Report, 2015_ , http://www.jnj. com/about-jnj/publications, accessed April 22, 2016. 

24. K. King, “Johnson & Johnson: Company Overview,” _Harvard Business School Open Knowledge_ online, https://rctom.hbs.org, December 8, 2015. 

25. Noli Dinkoviski, “Kellogg’s Cutbacks Make the Factory More Efficient,” _Food Manufacture UK,_ August 11, 2016, http://www.foodmanufacture.co.uk/Manufacturing/Kellogg-scutbacks-make-the-factory-more-efficient (accessed December 23, 2016); Matt Atherton, “Kellogg’s Factory Features in BBC Documentary,” _Food Manufacture UK,_ July 25, 2016, http://www.foodmanufacture.co.uk/Manufacturing/BBCdocumentary-reveals-Kellogg-s-secrets (accessed December 23, 2016). 

26. Ibid. 

27. D. A. Morand, “The Role of Behavioral Formality and Informality in the Enactment of Bureaucratic Versus Organic Organizations,” _Academy of Management Review_ , October 1995, pp. 831–872; and T. Burns and G. M. Stalker, _The Management of Innovation_ (London: Tavistock, 1961). 

28. C. Feser, “Long Live Bureaucracy!,” _Leader to Leader,_ Summer 2012, pp. 57–62. 

29. “How to Bust Corporate Barriers,” _Gallup Management Journal online,_ August 18, 2011; and D. Dougherty, “Reimagining the Differentiation and Integration of Work for Sustained Product Innovation,” _Organization Science_ (September–October 2001), pp. 612–631. 

30. A. D. Chandler, Jr., _Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the History of the Industrial Enterprise_ (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1962). 

**Chapter 11** Organization Design **411** 

31. See, for instance, W. Chan Kim and R. Mauborgne, “How Strategy Shapes Structure,” _Harvard Business Review,_ September 2009, pp. 73–80; L. L. Bryan and C. I. Joyce, “Better Strategy Through Organizational Design,” _The McKinsey Quarterly,_ 2007, no. 2, pp. 21–29; D. Jennings and S. Seaman, “High and Low Levels of Organizational Adaptation: An Empirical Analysis of Strategy, Structure, and Performance,” _Strategic Management Journal_ , July 1994, pp. 459–475; D. C. Galunic and K. M. Eisenhardt, “Renewing the Strategy-Structure-Performance Paradigm,” in _Research in Organizational Behavior_ , vol. 16, ed. B. M. Staw and L. L. Cummings (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1994), pp. 215–255; R. Parthasarthy and S. P. Sethi, “Relating Strategy and Structure to Flexible Automation: A Test of Fit and Performance Implications,” _Strategic Management Journal_ , vol. 14, no. 6 (1993), pp. 529–549; H. A. Simon, “Strategy and Organizational Evolution,” _Strategic Management Journal_ , January 1993, pp. 131–142; H. L. Boschken, “Strategy and Structure: Re-conceiving the Relationship,” _Journal of Management_ , March 1990, pp. 135–150; D. Miller, “The Structural and Environmental Correlates of Business Strategy,” _Strategic Management Journal_ , January–February 1987, pp. 55– 76; and R. E. Miles and C. C. Snow, _Organizational Strategy, Structure, and Process_ (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1978). 

32. Leader Making a Difference box based on M. Schuman, “Zhang Ruimin’s Haier Power,” time.com, April 4, 2014; “Fortune Names Haier Group Chairman & CEO Zhang Ruimin Among ‘The World’s 50 Greatest Leaders,’” globenewswire.com, March 21, 2014; P. Day, “Smashing Way to Start a Global Business,” www.bbc.news, October 22, 2013; “Haier and Higher,” www.economist.com, October 12, 2013; R. Gluckman, “Every Customer Is Always Right,” _Forbes,_ May 21, 2012, pp. 38–40; G. Colvin, “The Next Management Icon: Would You Believe He’s from China?,” _Fortune,_ July 25, 2011, p. 77; and D. J. Lynch, “CEO Pushes China’s Haier as Global Brand,” _USA Today,_ January 3, 2003, pp. 1B+. 

33. See, for instance, R. Z. Gooding and J. A. Wagner III, “A Meta-Analytic Review of the Relationship Between Size and Performance: The Productivity and Efficiency of Organizations and Their Subunits,” _Administrative Science Quarterly_ , December 1985, pp. 462–481; D. S. Pugh, “The Aston Program of Research: Retrospect and Prospect,” in _Perspectives on Organization Design and Behavior, ed_ . A. H. Van de Ven and W. F. Joyce (New York: John Wiley, 1981), pp. 135–166; and P. M. Blau and R. A. Schoenherr, _The Structure of Organizations_ (New York: Basic Books, 1971). 

34. P. Kavilanz, “Louisville’s CloudDDM Factory: 100 Printers, 3 Employees,” _CNN Money_ online, www.money.cnn.com, May 4, 2015. 

35. J. Woodward, _Industrial Organization: Theory and Practice_ (London: Oxford University Press, 1965). 

36. See, for instance, J. Zhang and C. Baden-Fuller, “The Influence of Technological Knowledge Base and Organizational Structure on Technology Collaboration,” _Journal of Management Studies,_ June 2010, pp. 679–704; C. C. Miller, W. H. Glick, Y. D. Wang, and G. Huber, “Understanding Technology-Structure Relationships: Theory Development and Meta-Analytic Theory Testing,” _Academy of Management Journal,_ June 1991, pp. 370–399; J. Hage and M. Aiken, “Routine Technology, Social Structure, and Organizational Goals,” _Administrative Science Quarterly_ , 

September 1969, pp. 366–377; J. D. Thompson, _Organizations in Action_ (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967); and C. Perrow, “A Framework for the Comparative Analysis of Organizations,” _American Sociological Review_ , April 1967, pp. 194–208. 

37. D. M. Rousseau and R. A. Cooke, “Technology and Structure: The Concrete, Abstract, and Activity Systems of Organizations,” _Journal of Management_ , Fall–Winter 1984, pp. 345–361; and D. Gerwin, “Relationships Between Structure and Technology,” in _Handbook of Organizational Design_ , vol. 2, ed. P. C. Nystrom and W. H. Starbuck (New York: Oxford University Press, 1981), pp. 3–38. 

38. S. Rausch and J. Birkinshaw, “Organizational Ambidexterity: Antecedents, Outcomes, and Moderators,” _Journal of Management,_ June 2008, pp. 375–409; M. Yasai-Ardekani, “Structural Adaptations to Environments,” _Academy of Management Review_ , January 1986, pp. 9–21; P. Lawrence and J. W. Lorsch, _Organization and Environment: Managing Differentiation and Integration_ (Boston: Harvard Business School, Division of Research, 1967); and F. E. Emery and E. Trist, “The Causal Texture of Organizational Environments,” _Human Relations_ , February 1965, pp. 21–32. 

39. B. Mutzabaugh, “Era of Airline Merger Mania Comes to a Close with Last US Airways Flight,” _USA Today_ online, www. usatoday.com, October 16, 2015. 

40. “Toyota Shakes Up Corporate Structure to Focus on Product Lines,” _Reuters,_ March 2, 2016, http://www.reuters.com/ article/us-toyota-management-structure-idUSKCN0W41CB (accessed December 23, 2016); Toyota global site http:// www.toyota-global.com/company/profile/facilities/ (accessed December 23, 2016). 

41. H. Mintzberg, _Structure in Fives: Designing Effective Organizations_ (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1983), p. 157. 

42. R. J. Williams, J. J. Hoffman, and B. T. Lamont, “The Influence of Top Management Team Characteristics on M-Form Implementation Time,” _Journal of Managerial Issues_ , Winter 1995, pp. 466–480. 

43. Q. Hardy, “Google Thinks Small,” _Forbes,_ November 14, 2005, pp. 198–202. 

44. See, for example, A. C. Edmondson, “Teamwork on the Fly,” _Harvard Business Review,_ April 2012, pp. 72–80; D. R. Denison, S. L. Hart, and J. A. Kahn, “From Chimneys to Cross-Functional Teams: Developing and Validating a Diagnostic Model,” _Academy of Management Journal_ , December 1996, pp. 1005–1023; D. Ray and H. Bronstein, _Teaming Up: Making the Transition to a Self-Directed TeamBased Organization_ (New York: McGraw Hill, 1995); J. R. Katzenbach and D. K. Smith, _The Wisdom of Teams_ (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1993); J. A. Byrne, “The Horizontal Corporation,” _BusinessWeek,_ December 20, 1993, pp. 76–81; B. Dumaine, “Payoff from the New Management,” _Fortune,_ December 13, 1993, pp. 103–110; and H. Rothman, “The Power of Empowerment,” _Nation’s Business_ , June 1993, pp. 49–52. 

45. R. Feloni, “Google Has Found That Its Most Successful Teams Have 5 Traits in Common,” _Business Insider_ online, www.businessinsider.com, November 18, 2015. 

46. E. Krell, “Managing the Matrix,” _HR Magazine,_ April 2011, pp. 69–71. 

47. J. Hyatt, “Engineering Inspiration,” _Newsweek,_ June 14, 2010, p. 44; T. McKeough, “Blowing Hot and Cold,” _Fast Company,_ 

**412** _**Part 4**_ Organizing 

December 2009–January 2010, p. 66; H. Walters, “Inside the Design Thinking Process,” _BusinessWeek_ online, December 15, 2009; P. Kaihla, “Best-Kept Secrets of the World’s Best Companies,” _Business 2.0,_ April 2006, p. 83; C. Taylor, “School of Bright Ideas,” _Time Inside Business,_ April 2005, pp. A8–A12; and B. Nussbaum, “The Power of Design,” _BusinessWeek,_ May 17, 2004, pp. 86–94. 

48. R. L. Hotz, “More Scientists Treat Experiments as a Team Sport,” _Wall Street Journal,_ November 20, 2009, p. A23. 

49. See, for example, G. G. Dess, A. M. A. Rasheed, K. J. McLaughlin, and R. L. Priem, “The New Corporate Architecture,” _Academy of Management Executive_ , August 1995, pp. 7–20. 

50. For additional readings on boundaryless organizations, see Rausch and Birkinshaw, “Organizational Ambidexterity,” June 2008; M. F. R. Kets de Vries, “Leadership Group Coaching in Action: The Zen of Creating High-Performance Teams,” _Academy of Management Executive,_ February 2005, pp. 61–76; J. Child and R. G. McGrath, “Organizations Unfettered: Organizational Form in an Information-Intensive Economy,” _Academy of Management Journal,_ December 2001, pp. 1135–1148; M. Hammer and S. Stanton, “How Process Enterprises Really Work,” _Harvard Business Review_ , November–December 1999, pp. 108–118; T. Zenger and W. Hesterly, “The Disaggregation of Corporations: Selective Intervention, High-Powered Incentives, and Modular Units,” _Organization Science,_ 1997, vol. 8, pp. 209–222; R. Ashkenas, D. Ulrich, T. Jick, and S. Kerr, _The Boundaryless Organization: Breaking the Chains of Organizational Structure_ (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1997); R. M. Hodgetts, “A Conversation with Steve Kerr,” _Organizational Dynamics_ , Spring 1996, pp. 68–79; and J. Gebhardt, “The Boundaryless Organization,” _Sloan Management Review_ , Winter 1996, pp. 117–119. For another view of boundaryless organizations, see B. Victor, “The Dark Side of the New Organizational Forms: An Editorial Essay,” _Organization Science_ , November 1994, pp. 479–482. 

51. J. Marte, “An Internship from Your Couch,” _Wall Street Journal,_ September 9, 2009, pp. D1+. 

52. J. Yang and A. Gonzalez, “If Given A Choice, I’d Rather Work… ” _USA Today,_ January 22, 2013, p. 1B. 

53. See, for instance, R. J. King, “It’s a Virtual World,” _Strategy+Business,_ www.strategy-business.com, April 21, 2009; Y. Shin, “A Person-Environment Fit Model for Virtual Organizations,” _Journal of Management,_ December 2004, pp. 725–743; D. Lyons, “Smart and Smarter,” _Forbes,_ March 18, 2002, pp. 40–41; W. F. Cascio, “Managing a Virtual Workplace,” _Academy of Management Executive,_ August 2000, pp. 81–90; G. G. Dess, A. M. A. Rasheed, K. J. McLaughlin, and R. L. Priem, “The New Corporate Architecture”; H. Chesbrough and D. Teece, “When Is Virtual Virtuous: Organizing for Innovation,” _Harvard Business Review,_ January–February 1996, pp. 65–73; and W. H. Davidow and M. S. Malone, _The Virtual Corporation_ (New York: Harper Collins, 1992). 

54. Q. Hardy, “Bit by Bit, Work Exchange Site Aims to Get Jobs Done,” _New York Times_ online, November 6, 2011. 

55. M. V. Rafter, “Cultivating a Virtual Culture,” _Workforce Management Online,_ April 5, 2012. 

56. C. Kauffman, “Employee Involvement: A New Blueprint for Success,” _Journal of Accountancy,_ May 2010, pp. 46–49; and 

   - R. L. Daft, _Management,_ 9th ed. (Mason, OH: South-Western Cengage Learning, 2010), p. 262. 

57. M. Conlin, “Home Offices: The New Math,” _BusinessWeek,_ March 9, 2009, pp. 66–68. 

58. C. Wells and J. S. Lublin, “Employees Like Flexible Work Programs, But Few Use Them,” _The Wall Street Journal_ online, www.wsj.com, September 30, 2015. 

59. M. Conlin, “Home Offices: The New Math.” 

60. J. Marquez, “Connecting a Virtual Workforce.” 

61. S. Jayson, “Working At Home: Family-Friendly,” _USA Today,_ April 15, 2010, pp. 1A+; T. D. Hecht and N. J. Allen, “A Longitudinal Examination of the Work-Nonwork Boundary Strength Construct,” _Journal of Organizational Behavior,_ October 2009, pp. 839–862; and G. E. Kreiner, E. C. Hollensbe, and M. L. Sheep, “Balancing Borders and Bridges: Negotiating the Work-Home Interface via Boundary Work Tactics,” _Academy of Management Journal,_ August 2009, pp. 704–730. 

62. C. Wells and J. S. Lublin, “Employees Like Flexible Work Programs.” 

63. J. T. Marquez, “The Future of Flex,” _Workforce Management Online,_ January 27, 2010. 

64. B. Walsh, “Thank God It’s Thursday,” _Time,_ September 7, 2009, p. 58. 

65. J. Sahadi, “The 4-Day Workweek Is Real for Employees at These Companies,” _CNN Money,_ www.money.cnn.com, April 27, 2015. 

66. K. Matos and E. Galinsky, “2014 National Study of Employers,” Family and Work Institute, 2014. 

67. J. Sahadi, “Flex-time, Time Off—Who’s Getting These Perks?,” _CNNMoney.com_ , June 25, 2007. 

68. M. Arndt, “The Family That Flips Together …” _BusinessWeek,_ April 17, 2006, p. 14. 

69. S. Greenhouse, “Work-Sharing May Help Companies Avoid Layoffs,” _New York Times_ online, www.nytimes.com, June 16, 2009. 

70. J. Yang and A. Gonzalez, “Would Asking for Flexible Work Options Hurt Your Career Advancement?,” _USA Today,_ October 2, 2013, p. 1B. 

71. “Toyota Group Making 1,000 Temp Workers Full-time,” _Nikkei Asian Review,_ November 24, 2016, http://asia.nikkei .com/Business/Companies/Toyota-group-making-1-000-tempworkers-full-time (accessed December 23, 2016). 

72. I. Speizer, “Special Report on Contingency Staffing—The Future of Contingent Staffing Could Be Like Something Out of a Movie,” _Workforce Management Online,_ October 19, 2009. 

73. SAP, “The Rise of the Contingent Worker,” _Forbes_ online, www.forbes.com, December 19, 2014. 

74. E. Frauenheim, “Special Report on HR Technology: Tracking the Contingents,” _Workforce Management Online,_ April 2010. 

75. S. G. Hauser, “Independent Contractors Helping to Shape the New World of Work,” _Workforce Management Online,_ February 3, 2012; S. Greenhouse, “U.S. Cracks Down on ‘Contractors’ as a Tax Dodge,” _New York Times_ online, www.nytimes.com, February 18, 2010; and M. Orey, “FedEx: They’re Employees. No, They’re Not,” _Bloomberg BusinessWeek,_ November 5, 2009, pp. 73–74. 

76. C. Hausman, “Lifeguard Fired for Leaving Patrol Zone to Save Drowning Man,” _Ethics Newsline online,_ July 9, 2012; S. Grossman, “Lifeguard Who Got Fired for Saving Drowning 

**Chapter 11** Organization Design **413** 

Swimmer Declines Offer to Return,” newsfeed.time.com, July 6, 2012; E. Illades and C. Teproff, “Fired Lifeguard Says ‘No Thanks’ When He’s Re-offered Job,” MiamiHerald.com, July 5, 2012; and W. Lee, “Florida Lifeguard Helps Save Life, Gets Fired,” _USA Today_ online, July 4, 2012. 

77. Based on H. Mintzberg, _Power In and Around Organizations_ (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1983), p. 24; P. L. Hunsaker, _Training in Management Skills_ (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2001), pp. 339–364; G. Ferris, S. Davidson, and P. Perrewé, “Developing Political Skill at Work,” _Training,_ November 2005, pp. 40–45; B. Uzzi and S. Dunlap, “How to Build Your Network,” _Harvard Business Review,_ December 2005, pp. 53–60; and B. Brim, “The Best Way to Influence Others,” _Gallup Management Journal,_ http:// gmj.gallup.com, February 9, 2006. 

78. S. Silbermann, “How Culture and Regulation Demand New Ways to Sell,” _Harvard Business Review,_ July/August 2012, pp. 104–105; P. Miller and T. Wedell-Wedellsborg, “How to Make an Offer That Managers Can’t Refuse?” _IESE Insight,_ 2011 (second quarter), issue 9, pp. 66–67; S. Hernández, “Prove Its Worth,” _IESE Insight,_ 2011 (second quarter), no. 9, p. 68; T. Koulopoulos, “Know Thyself,” _IESE Insight,_ 

   - 2011 (second quarter), no. 9, p. 69; M. Weinstein, “Retrain and Restructure Your Organization,” _Training,_ May 2009, p. 36; J. McGregor, “Outsourcing Tasks Instead of Jobs,” _Bloomberg BusinessWeek,_ March 11, 2009; “Pfizer: Making It ‘Leaner, Meaner, More Efficient,’” _BusinessWeek_ online, www. bloomberg.com/businessweek, March 2, 2009; and A. Cohen, “Scuttling Scut Work,” _Fast Company,_ February 1, 2008, pp. 42–43. 

79. A. Cohen, “Scuttling Scut Work,” _Fast Company,_ February 1, 2008, pp. 42–43. 

80. J. McGregor, “Outsourcing Tasks Instead of Jobs,” _Bloomberg BusinessWeek,_ March 11, 2009. 

81. J. Graham, “Product Fans Can Become Customer Service Reps,” _USA Today,_ May 31, 2012, p. 3B; A. Fox, “Pave the Way for Volunteers,” _HR Magazine,_ June 2010, pp. 70–74; G. Morse, “The Power of Unwitting Workers,” _Harvard Business Review,_ October 2009, p. 27; S. Lohr, “Customer Service? Ask A Volunteer,” _New York Times Online_ , April 26, 2009; and B. Xu, D. R. Jones, and B. Shao, “Volunteers’ Involvement in Online Community Based Software Development,” _Information & Management,_ April 2009, pp. 151–158. 

