## Chapter 16 = 

## **Leadership** 

## **It’s Your Career** 

## Being a More Charismatic Leader 

_Charisma. Can you think of someone you would describe as having charisma? How would you describe that person? Enthusiastic? Self-confident? Engaging? Inspiring? Likable? Able to relate to anyone? Maybe even magical? So are you born with charisma or can you learn to be a charismatic leader? The answer is_ yes _and_ yes _. Individuals are born with traits that make them charismatic. But that isn’t the only way to develop charisma. The good news is that charisma is a skill you can cultivate. Why is that good news? Because being viewed as charismatic can be a valuable asset in your career. So let’s look at some suggestions on how you can develop your charisma:_ 

Source: Aleksandr Bryliaev/Shutterstock 

_**A key to success in management and in your career is knowing how to become more charismatic.**_ 

_**1. Focus on others, not yourself.** Take a sincere interest in whoever you’re interacting with. Look them in the eye and emotionally connect with them. Be sensitive to others’ needs. Empathy is a powerful tool. Charismatic individuals have the ability to read others’ emotions and make an emotional connection with them. Make others feel as if they’re the most important person in the room. Show by word and deed that you do indeed understand and care about them and their concerns._ 

_**2. Be more extroverted.** Yes, you have to put yourself “out there.” Actively seek out and engage others in different situations and environments. Although this may be harder for an individual who is more inclined to be an introvert, it just means you may have to try a little harder to connect with other people. Remember, you’re trying to develop your skill set and position yourself to be successful._ 

_**3. Work on your communication skills.** Charismatic individuals are skilled at expressive verbal communication. How can you get better at this? Use passion as a catalyst for generating enthusiasm and communicate with your whole body, not just with words. Use an animated_ 

## Pearson MyLab Management[®] 

## **Improve Your Grade!** 

When you see this icon, visit **www.mymanagementlab.com** for activities that are applied, personalized, and offer immediate feedback. 

## **Learning Objectives** 

## _**16.1**_ **Define** leader and leadership. 

- _**16.2**_ **Compare** and contrast early theories of leadership. 

- _**16.3**_ **Describe** the three major contingency theories of leadership. 

   - **Develop your skill** at choosing an effective leadership style. 

- _**16.4**_ **Describe** contemporary views of leadership. 

   - **Know how** to prepare for an effective transition to a leadership position. 

- _**16.5**_ **Discuss** twenty-first century issues affecting leadership. 

_voice and reinforce your message with eye contact and facial expressions. Use gestures for emphasis. Work at becoming a skilled and entertaining conversationalist. But you have to be sincere in your communication—whether it’s one-on-one or with a group of people._ 

_**4. Control your emotions.** A charismatic_ 

_leader has the ability to control and regulate his or_ 

_her emotions. For instance, know when, where, and how to use certain emotions to make a point. . . . whether that’s being outraged at some situation or by turning on the charm in another._ 

_**5. Exhibit self-confidence.** As you develop_ 

_your work skills, be confident in your interactions with others. Become someone that others like, trust, and admire._ 

If someone asked you to name a great leader, who would you name? Many individuals point to the late Steve Jobs of Apple as a great leader. And he does provide a fascinating example of the “whats” and “hows” of leadership. His leadership approach and style is not what you’d read about in most books on leadership. And how he led Apple probably wouldn’t work in all situations, if any others. But leadership _is_ needed in _all_ organizations. Why? Because it’s the leaders in organizations who make things happen. 

## WHO **are leaders and what is leadership?** 

**LO16.1** Let’s begin by clarifying who leaders are and what leadership is. Our definition of a **leader** is someone who can influence others and who has managerial authority. **Leadership** is a process of leading a group and influencing that group to achieve its goals. It’s what leaders do. 

Are all managers leaders? Because leading is one of the four management functions, yes, ideally, all managers _should_ be leaders. Thus, we’re going to study leaders and leadership from a managerial perspective.[1] However, even though we’re looking at 

## leader 

Someone who can influence others and who has managerial authority 

## leadership 

achieve goals 

**555** 

**556** _**Part 5**_ Leading 

these from a managerial perspective, we’re aware that groups often have informal leaders who emerge. Although these informal leaders may be able to influence others, they have not been the focus of most leadership research and are not the types of leaders we’re studying in this chapter. 

Leaders and leadership, like motivation, are organizational behavior topics that have been researched a lot. Most of that research has been aimed at answering the question: _What is an effective leader_ ? We’ll begin our study of leadership by looking at some early leadership theories that attempted to answer that question. 

## EARLY **leadership theories** 

**LO16.2** People have been interested in leadership since they started coming together in groups to accomplish goals. However, it wasn’t until the early part of the twentieth century that researchers actually began to study leadership. These early leadership theories focused on the _leader_ (leadership trait theories) and how the _leader interacted_ with his or her group members (leadership behavior theories). 

## **Leadership Traits** 

Researchers at the Universities of Florida and North Carolina reported that taller men, compared to shorter men, tended to possess higher levels of social esteem, become successful leaders, earn more money, and have greater career success.[2] What does a study of height have to do with trait theories of leadership? Well, that’s also what leadership trait theories have attempted to do—identify certain traits that all leaders have. 

## FYI 

- 79 percent of senior executives say that showing confidence and “grace under fire” contribute to a woman’s executive presence. 

- 76 percent of senior executives say these characteristics contribute to a man’s executive presence.[4] 

Leadership research in the 1920s and 1930s focused on isolating leader traits—that is, characteristics—that would differentiate leaders from nonleaders. Some of the traits studied included physical stature, appearance, social class, emotional stability, fluency of speech, and sociability. Despite the best efforts of researchers, it proved impossible to identify a set of traits that would _always_ differentiate a leader (the person) from a nonleader. Maybe it was a bit optimistic to think that a set of consistent and unique traits would apply universally to all effective leaders, no matter whether they were in charge of Mary Kay Cosmetics, the Moscow Ballet, the country of France, a local collegiate chapter of Alpha Chi Omega, Ted’s Malibu Surf Shop, or Oxford University. However, later attempts to identify traits consistently associated with _leadership_ (the process of leading, not the person) were more successful. The eight traits shown to be associated with effective leadership are described briefly in Exhibit 16-1.[3] 

Researchers eventually recognized that traits alone were not sufficient for identifying effective leaders since explanations based solely on traits ignored the interactions of leaders and their group members as well as situational factors. Possessing the appropriate traits only made it more likely that an individual would be an effective leader. Therefore, leadership research from the late 1940s to the mid-1960s concentrated on the preferred behavioral styles that leaders demonstrated. Researchers wondered whether something unique in what effective leaders _did_ —in other words, in their _behavior_ —was the key. 

## **Leadership Behaviors** 

Carter Murray, CEO of advertising agency FCB, once told a colleague, “Look, I think you’re amazing, incredibly talented and you can do even more than you think in your wildest dreams. And I am not going to manage you to do that. You will determine that yourself.”[5] In contrast, Martha Stewart, founder of Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, was known for her demanding leadership approach. It was reported that she micromanaged employees and treated them as a commodity.[6] (We say more about dealing with micromanaging bosses in the _Workplace Confidential_ feature on page 570.) These two leaders, as you can see, behaved in two very different ways. What do we know about leader behavior and how can it help us in our understanding of what an effective leader is? 

**Chapter 16** Leadership **557** 

## **Exhibit 16-1** 

**1.** _**Drive.**_ Leaders exhibit a high effort level. They have a relatively high desire for achievement, they are ambitious, they have a lot of energy, they are tirelessly persistent in their activities, and they show initiative. 

**2.** _**Desire to lead.**_ Leaders have a strong desire to influence and lead others. They demonstrate the willingness to take responsibility. 

**3.** _**Honesty and integrity.**_ Leaders build trusting relationships with followers by being truthful or nondeceitful and by showing high consistency between word and deed. 

**4.** _**Self-confidence.**_ Followers look to leaders for an absence of self-doubt. Leaders, therefore, need to show self-confidence in order to convince followers of the rightness of their goals and decisions. 

**5.** _**Intelligence.**_ Leaders need to be intelligent enough to gather, synthesize, and interpret large amounts of information, and they need to be able to create visions, solve problems, and make correct decisions. 

Eight Traits Associated with Leadership 

_Sources:_ Based on S. A. Kirkpatrick and E. A. Locke, “Leadership: Do Traits Really Matter?” _Academy of Management Executive,_ May 1991, pp. 48–60; T. A. Judge, J. E. Bono, R. Ilies, and M. W. Gerhardt, “Personality and Leadership: A Qualitative and Quantitative Review,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , August 2002, pp. 765–780; and R. L. Schaumberg and F. J. Flynn, “Uneasy Lies the Head That Wears the Crown: The Link Between Guilt Proneness and Leadership,” _Journal of Personality and Social Psychology_ , August 2012, pp. 327–342. 

**6.** _**Job-relevant knowledge.**_ Effective leaders have a high degree of knowledge about the company, industry, and technical matters. In-depth knowledge allows leaders to make well-informed decisions and to understand the implications of those decisions. 

**7.** _**Extraversion.**_ Leaders are energetic, lively people. They are sociable, assertive, and rarely silent or withdrawn. 

**8.** _**Proneness to guilt.**_ Guilt proneness is positively related to leadership effectiveness because it produces a strong sense of responsibility for others. 

Researchers hoped that the **behavioral theories** approach would provide more definitive answers about the nature of leadership than did the trait theories.[7] The four main leader behavior studies are summarized in Exhibit 16-2. 

**UNIVERSITY OF IOWA STUDIES** The University of Iowa studies explored three leadership styles to find which was the most effective.[8] The **autocratic style** described a leader who dictated work methods, made unilateral decisions, and limited employee participation. The **democratic style** described a leader who involved employees in decision making, delegated authority, and used feedback as an opportunity for coaching employees. Finally, the **laissez-faire style** leader let the group make decisions and complete the work in whatever way it saw fit. The researchers’ results seemed to indicate that the democratic style contributed to both good quantity and quality of work. Had the answer to the question of the most effective leadership style been found? Unfortunately, it wasn’t that simple. Later studies of the autocratic and democratic styles showed mixed results. For instance, the democratic style sometimes produced higher performance levels than the autocratic style, but at other times, it didn’t. However, more consistent results were found when a measure of employee satisfaction was used. Group members were more satisfied under a democratic leader than under an autocratic one.[9] 

## behavioral theories 

Leadership theories that identify behaviors that differentiate effective leaders from ineffective leaders 

## autocratic style 

A leader who dictates work methods, makes unilateral decisions, and limits employee participation 

## democratic style 

A leader who involves employees in decision making, delegates authority, and uses feedback as an opportunity for coaching employees 

## laissez-faire style 

A leader who lets the group make decisions and complete the work in whatever way it sees fit 

Now leaders had a dilemma! Should they focus on achieving higher performance or on achieving higher member satisfaction? This recognition of the dual nature of a leader’s behavior—that is, focus on the task and focus on the people—was also a key characteristic of the other behavioral studies. 

**THE OHIO STATE STUDIES** The Ohio State studies identified two important dimensions of leader behavior.[10] Beginning with a list of more than 1,000 behavioral dimensions, the researchers eventually narrowed it down to just two that accounted for most of the leadership behavior described by group members. The first was called **initiating structure** , which referred to the extent to which a leader defined his or her role and the roles of group members in attaining goals. It included behaviors that involved attempts to organize work, work relationships, and goals. For instance, the typical medical and health services manager job exemplifies initiating structure behaviors. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, medical and health services managers “plan, implement and administer programs and services in a health care or medical facility, including personnel administration, training, and coordination of 

## initiating structure 

his or her role and the roles of group members in attaining goals 

**558** _**Part 5**_ Leading 

## **Exhibit 16-2** 

Behavioral Theories of Leadership 

## consideration 

The extent to which a leader has work relationships characterized by mutual trust and respect for group members’ ideas and feelings 

## high–high leader 

A leader high in both initiating structure and consideration behaviors 

||**Behavioral Dimension**|**Conclusion**|
|---|---|---|
|University of|_Democratic style:_involving|Democratic style of leadership|
|Iowa|subordinates, delegating|was most effective, although|
||authority, and encouraging|later studies showed mixed|
||participation|results.|
||_Autocratic style:_dictating work||
||methods, centralizing decision||
||making, and limiting||
||participation||
||_Laissez-faire style:_giving||
||group freedom to make||
||decisions and complete work||
|Ohio State|_Consideration:_being|High–high leader (high in|
||considerate of followers’|consideration and high in|
||ideas and feelings|initiating structure) achieved|
|||high subordinate performance|
|||and satisfaction, but not in all|
|||situations.|
||_Initiating structure:_structuring||
||work and work relationships to||
||meet job goals||
|University of|_Employee oriented:_|Employee-oriented leaders were|
|Michigan|emphasized interpersonal|associated with high group|
||relationships and taking|productivity and higher job|
||care of employees’ needs|satisfaction.|
||_Production oriented:_||
||emphasized technical||
||or task aspects of job||
|Managerial|_Concern for people:_|Leaders performed best with|
|Grid|measured leader’s concern|a 9,9 style (high concern for|
||for subordinates on a scale|production and high concern|
||of 1 to 9 (low to high)|for people).|
||_Concern for production:_||
||measured leader’s concern for||
||getting job done on a scale of||
||1 to 9 (low to high)||



medical, nursing and physical plant staff.”[11] The second was called **consideration** , which was defined as the extent to which a leader had work relationships characterized by mutual trust and respect for group members’ ideas and feelings. A leader who was high in consideration helped group members with personal problems, was friendly and approachable, and treated all group members as equals. He or she showed concern for (was considerate of) his or her followers’ comfort, well-being, status, and satisfaction. One researcher described leader consideration this way: “The daily practice of putting the well-being of others first has a compounding and reciprocal effect in relationships, in friendships, in the way we treat our clients and our colleagues.”[12] Research found that a leader who was high in both initiating structure and consideration (a **high–high leader** ) sometimes achieved high group task performance and high group member satisfaction, but not always. 

**UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN STUDIES** Leadership studies conducted at the University of Michigan at about the same time as those done at Ohio State also hoped to identify behavioral characteristics of leaders that were related to performance effectiveness. The Michigan group also came up with two dimensions of leadership behavior, which they labeled employee oriented and production oriented.[13] Leaders who were _employee oriented_ were described as emphasizing interpersonal relationships. The 

**Chapter 16** Leadership **559** 

_production-oriented_ leaders, in contrast, tended to emphasize the task aspects of the job. Unlike the other studies, the Michigan researchers concluded that leaders who were employee oriented were able to get high group productivity and high group member satisfaction. 

**THE MANAGERIAL GRID** The behavioral dimensions 4. from these early leadership studies provided the basis for - jfae the development of a two-dimensional grid for appraising leadership styles. This **managerial grid** used the behavioral dimensions “concern for people” (the vertical part of the grid) and “concern for production” (the horizontal part ; of the grid) and evaluated a leader’s use of these behaviors, ; ranking them on a scale from 1 (low) to 9 (high).[14] Although the grid had 81 potential categories into which a leader’s behavioral style might fall, only five styles were named: impoverished management (1,1, or low concern for production, low concern for people), task management (9,1, or high concern for production, low concern for people), middle-of-the-road management (5,5, or medium concern for production, medium concern for people), country club management (1,9, or low concern for production, high concern for people), and team management (9,9, or high concern for production, high concern for people). Of these five styles, the researchers concluded that managers performed best when using a 9,9 style. Unfortunately, the grid offered no answers to the question of what made a manager an effective leader; it only provided a framework for conceptualizing leadership style. In fact, little substantive evidence supports the conclusion that a 9,9 style is most effective in all situations.[15] 

Oprah Winfrey, founder of Oprah Winfrey Network, is an employee-oriented leader. Her compassionate and nurturing behavior towards subordinates helps them realize their full potential, inspires them to succeed, and results in their loyalty and job satisfaction. Caring for her employees has contributed to Oprah’s success as an entrepreneur and business leader. 

Source: Greg Allen/AP Images 

## managerial grid 

A two-dimensional grid for appraising leadership styles 

Leadership researchers were discovering that predicting leadership success involved something more complex than isolating a few leader traits or preferable behaviors. They began looking at situational influences; specifically, which leadership styles might be suitable in different situations and what these different situations might be. 

If your professor has assigned this, go to **www.mymanagementlab.com** to watch a video titled: _Leading_ and to respond to questions. 

## **Watch It! 1** 

## CONTINGENCY **theories of leadership** 

**LO16.3** “The corporate world is filled with stories of leaders who failed to achieve greatness because they failed to understand the context they were working in.”[16] In this section, we examine three contingency theories—Fiedler, Hersey-Blanchard, and path-goal. Each looks at defining leadership style and the situation and attempts to answer the _if-then_ contingencies (that is, _if_ this is the context or situation, _then_ this is the best leadership style to use). 

## **The Fiedler Model** 

The first comprehensive contingency model for leadership was developed by Fred Fiedler.[17] The **Fiedler contingency model** proposed that effective group performance depended on properly matching the leader’s style and the amount of control and influence in the situation. The model was based on the premise that a certain leadership style would be most effective in different types of situations. The keys were to (1) define those leadership styles and the different types of situations and then (2) identify the appropriate combinations of style and situation. 

## Fiedler contingency model 

A leadership theory proposing that effective group performance depends on the proper match between a leader’s style and the degree to which the situation allows the leader to control and influence 

Fiedler proposed that a key factor in leadership success was an individual’s basic leadership style, either task oriented or relationship oriented. To measure a leader’s 

**560** _**Part 5**_ Leading 

least-preferred coworker (LPC) questionnaire A questionnaire that measures whether a leader is task or relationship oriented 

style, Fiedler developed the **least-preferred coworker (LPC) questionnaire** . This questionnaire contained 18 pairs of contrasting adjectives—for example, pleasant– unpleasant, cold–warm, boring–interesting, or friendly–unfriendly. Respondents were asked to think of all the coworkers they had ever had and to describe that one person they _least enjoyed_ working with by rating him or her on a scale of 1 to 8 for each of the 18 sets of adjectives (the 8 always described the positive adjective out of the pair and the 1 always described the negative adjective out of the pair). 

If the leader described the least-preferred coworker in relatively positive terms (in other words, a “high” LPC score—a score of 64 or above), then the respondent was primarily interested in good personal relations with coworkers and the style would be described as _relationship oriented._ In contrast, if you saw the least-preferred coworker in relatively unfavorable terms (a low LPC score—a score of 57 or below), you were primarily interested in productivity and getting the job done; thus, your style would be labeled as _task oriented._ Fiedler did acknowledge that a small number of people might fall between these two extremes and not have a cut-anddried leadership style. One other important point is that Fiedler assumed a person’s leadership style was fixed regardless of the situation. In other words, if you were a relationship-oriented leader, you’d always be one, and the same would be true for being task oriented. 

After an individual’s leadership style had been assessed through the LPC, it was time to evaluate the situation in order to match the leader with the situation. Fiedler’s research uncovered three contingency dimensions that defined the key situational factors in leader effectiveness. 

## leader–member relations 

One of Fiedler’s situational contingencies that describes the degree of confidence, trust, and respect employees have for their leader 

## task structure 

One of Fiedler’s situational contingencies that describes the degree to which job assignments are formalized and structured 

## position power 

One of Fiedler’s situational contingencies that describes the degree of influence a leader has over activities such as hiring, firing, discipline, promotions, and salary increases 

- **Leader–member relations:** the degree of confidence, trust, and respect employees have for their leader; rated as either good or poor. 

- **Task structure:** the degree to which job assignments are formalized and structured; rated as either high or low. 

- **Position power:** the degree of influence a leader has over activities such as hiring, firing, discipline, promotions, and salary increases; rated as either strong or weak. 

Each leadership situation was evaluated in terms of these three contingency variables, which, when combined, produced eight possible situations that were either favorable or unfavorable for the leader. (See the bottom of the chart in Exhibit 16-3.) Situations I, II, and III were classified as highly favorable for the leader. Situations IV, V, and VI were moderately favorable for the leader. And situations VII and VIII were described as highly unfavorable for the leader. 

Once Fiedler had described the leader variables and the situational variables, he had everything he needed to define the specific contingencies for leadership effectiveness. To do so, he studied 1,200 groups where he compared relationship-oriented versus taskoriented leadership styles in each of the eight situational categories. He concluded that task-oriented leaders performed better in very favorable situations and in very unfavorable situations. (See the top of Exhibit 16-3, where performance is shown on the vertical axis and situation favorableness is shown on the horizontal axis.) On the other hand, relationship-oriented leaders performed better in moderately favorable situations. 

Because Fiedler treated an individual’s leadership style as fixed, only two ways could improve leader effectiveness. First, you could bring in a new leader whose style better fit the situation. For instance, if the group situation was highly unfavorable but was led by a relationship-oriented leader, the group’s performance could be improved by replacing that person with a task-oriented leader. The second alternative was to change the situation to fit the leader. This could be done by restructuring tasks; by increasing or decreasing the power that the leader had over factors such as salary increases, promotions, and disciplinary actions; or by improving the leader–member relations. 

Research testing the overall validity of Fiedler’s model has shown considerable evidence to support the model.[18] However, his theory wasn’t without critics. The major criticism is that it’s probably unrealistic to assume that a person can’t change his or her leadership style to fit the situation. Effective leaders can, and do, change their styles. 

**Chapter 16** Leadership **561** 

## **Exhibit 16-3** 

The Fiedler Model 

**==> picture [454 x 209] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Good<br>Task<br>Oriented<br>Relationship<br>Oriented<br>Poor<br>Situation Favorableness: Highly Favorable Moderate Highly Unfavorable<br>a OoOekrr—e—cew=SSS<br>Category I II III IV V VI VII VIII<br>Leader–Member Good Good Good Good Poor Poor Poor Poor<br>   Relations<br>Task Structure High High Low Low High High Low Low<br>Position Power Strong Weak Strong Weak Strong Weak Strong Weak<br>Performance<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Another is that the LPC wasn’t very practical. Finally, the situation variables were difficult to assess.[19] Despite its shortcomings, the Fiedler model showed that effective leadership style needed to reflect situational factors. 

## **Hersey and Blanchard’s Situational Leadership Theory** 

Paul Hersey and Ken Blanchard developed a leadership theory that has gained a strong following among management development specialists.[20] This model, called **situational leadership theory (SLT)** , is a contingency theory that focuses on followers’ readiness. Before we proceed, two points need clarification: why a leadership theory focuses on the followers and what is meant by the term _readiness._ 

The emphasis on the followers in leadership effectiveness reflects the reality that it _is_ the followers who accept or reject the leader. Regardless of what the leader does, the group’s effectiveness depends on the actions of the followers. This important dimension has been overlooked or underemphasized in most leadership theories. And **readiness** , as defined by Hersey and Blanchard, refers to the extent to which people have the ability and willingness to accomplish a specific task. 

SLT uses the same two leadership dimensions that Fiedler identified: task and relationship behaviors. However, Hersey and Blanchard go a step further by considering each as either high or low and then combining them into four specific leadership styles described as follows: 

- _Telling_ (high task–low relationship): The leader defines roles and tells people what, how, when, and where to do various tasks. 

- _Selling_ (high task–high relationship): The leader provides both directive and supportive behavior. 

- _Participating_ (low task–high relationship): The leader and followers share in decision making; the main role of the leader is facilitating and communicating. 

- _Delegating_ (low task–low relationship): The leader provides little direction or support. 

With a high level of follower readiness, these designers are working on new bag ideas at Timbuk2 Design, a firm that creates and makes bags with company logos for new employees and salespeople at Twitter, Google, and other technology firms. Creative and responsible, they are willing and able to complete their tasks under leadership that gives them freedom to make and implement decisions, a relationship consistent with Hersey and Blanchard’s situational theory. Source: David Paul Morris/Getty Images 

situational leadership theory (SLT) A leadership contingency theory that focuses on followers’ readiness 

## readiness 

The extent to which people have the ability and willingness to accomplish a specific task 

**562** _**Part 5**_ Leading 

## FYI 

The percentage of leaders who consider themselves to be highly effective differs by skill sets: 

- 74 percent in communicating and interacting with others. 

- 67 percent in building consensus and commitment. 

- 56 percent in fostering employee creativity and innovation. 

- 39 percent in intercultural communication. 

- 34 percent in leading across countries and cultures.[22] 

## path-goal theory 

A leadership theory that says the leader’s job is to assist followers in attaining their goals and to provide direction or support needed to ensure that their goals are compatible with the goals of the group or organization 

The final component in the model is the four stages of follower readiness: 

- _R1:_ People are both _unable and unwilling_ to take responsibility for doing something. Followers aren’t competent or confident. 

- _R2:_ People are _unable but willing_ to do the necessary job tasks. Followers are motivated but lack the appropriate skills. 

- _R3:_ People are _able but unwilling_ to do what the leader wants. Followers are competent, but don’t want to do something. 

- _R4:_ People are both _able and willing_ to do what is asked of them. 

SLT essentially views the leader–follower relationship as being like that of a parent and a child. Just as a parent needs to relinquish control when a child becomes more mature and responsible, so too should leaders. As followers reach higher levels of readiness, the leader responds not only by decreasing control over their activities but also by decreasing relationship behaviors. The SLT says if followers are at R1 ( _unable_ and _unwilling_ to do a task), the leader needs to use the telling style and give clear and specific directions; if followers are at R2 ( _unable_ and _willing_ ), the leader needs to use the selling style and display high task orientation to compensate for the followers’ lack of ability and high relationship orientation to get followers to “buy into” the leader’s desires; if followers are at R3 ( _able_ and _unwilling_ ), the leader needs to use the participating style to gain their support; and if employees are at R4 (both _able_ and _willing_ ), the leader doesn’t need to do much and should use the delegating style. 

SLT has intuitive appeal. It acknowledges the importance of followers and builds on the logic that leaders can compensate for ability and motivational limitations in their followers. However, research efforts to test and support the theory generally have been disappointing.[21] Possible explanations include internal inconsistencies in the model as well as problems with research methodology. Despite its " so > appeal and wide popularity, we have to be cautious about any enthusiastic endorsement of SLT. 

## **Path-Goal Model** 

Another approach to understanding leadership is **path-goal theory** , which states that the leader’s job is to assist followers in attaining their goals and to provide direction or support needed to ensure that their goals are compatible with the goals of the group or organization. Developed by Robert House, path-goal theory takes key elements from the expectancy theory of motivation.[23] The term _path-goal_ is derived from the belief that effective leaders remove the roadblocks and pitfalls so that followers have a clearer path to help them get from where they are to the achievement of their work goals. 

House identified four leadership behaviors: 

- _Directive leader:_ Lets subordinates know what’s expected of them, schedules work to be done, and gives specific guidance on how to accomplish tasks. 

Bono (waving), U2’s leader, lead singer, and lyricist, uses the supportive and participative approaches of the path-goal theory. He includes band members in decision making, believing that their input is necessary to achieve excellence. And he supports them by expressing his appreciation for their talents in contributing to U2’s success and in achieving the band’s goal of improving the world through its music and influence. Source: Gregg DeGuire/WireImage/Getty Images 

   - _Supportive leader:_ Shows concern for the needs of followers and is friendly. 

- _Participative leader:_ Consults with group members and uses their suggestions before making a decision. 

- _Achievement-oriented leader:_ Sets challenging goals and expects followers to perform at their highest level. 

In contrast to Fiedler’s view that a leader couldn’t change his or her behavior, House assumed that leaders are flexible and can display any or all of these leadership styles depending on the situation. 

As Exhibit 16-4 illustrates, path-goal theory proposes two situational or contingency variables that moderate the leadership behavior–outcome relationship: those in the _envi-_ 

**Chapter 16** Leadership **563** 

**==> picture [364 x 334] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Environmental<br>Contingency Factors<br>• Task Structure<br>• Formal Authority System<br>• Work Group<br>Leader  Behavior  Outcomes<br>• Directive — • Performance<br>• Supportive • Satisfaction<br>• Participative<br>• Achievement Oriented<br>Subordinate<br>Contingency Factors<br>• Locus of Control<br>• Experience<br>• Perceived Ability<br>=<br>ronment  that are outside the control of the follower (factors including task structure, for-<br>mal authority system, and the work group) and those that are part of the personal char-<br>acteristics of the  follower  (including locus of control, experience, and perceived ability).<br>Environmental factors determine the type of leader behavior required if subordinate<br>outcomes are to be maximized; personal characteristics of the follower determine how<br>the environment and leader behavior are interpreted. The theory proposes that a leader’s<br>behavior won’t be effective if it’s redundant with what the environmental structure is<br>providing or is incongruent with follower characteristics. For example, some predictions<br>from path-goal theory are:<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## **Exhibit 16-4** 

Path-Goal Model 

- Directive leadership leads to greater satisfaction when tasks are ambiguous or stressful than when they are highly structured and well laid out. The followers aren’t sure what to do, so the leader needs to give them some direction. 

- Supportive leadership results in high employee performance and satisfaction when subordinates are performing structured tasks. In this situation, the leader only needs to support followers, not tell them what to do. 

- Directive leadership is likely to be perceived as redundant among subordinates with high perceived ability or with considerable experience. These followers are quite capable, so they don’t need a leader to tell them what to do. 

- The clearer and more bureaucratic the formal authority relationships, the more leaders should exhibit supportive behavior and deemphasize directive behavior. The organizational situation has provided the structure as far as what is expected of followers, so the leader’s role is simply to support. 

- Directive leadership will lead to higher employee satisfaction when there is substantive conflict within a work group. In this situation, the followers need a leader who will take charge. 

- Subordinates with an internal locus of control will be more satisfied with a participative style. Because these followers believe they control what happens to them, they prefer to participate in decisions. 

- Subordinates with an external locus of control will be more satisfied with a directive style. These followers believe that what happens to them is a result of the external environment, so they would prefer a leader who tells them what to do. 

- Achievement-oriented leadership will increase subordinates’ expectancies that effort will lead to high performance when tasks are ambiguously structured. By setting challenging goals, followers know what the expectations are. 

Testing path-goal theory has not been easy. A review of the research suggests mixed support.[24] To summarize the model, however, an employee’s performance and 

**564** _**Part 5**_ Leading 

satisfaction are likely to be positively influenced when the leader chooses a leadership style that compensates for shortcomings in either the employee or the work setting. However, if the leader spends time explaining tasks that are already clear or when the employee has the ability and experience to handle them without interference, the employee is likely to see such directive behavior as redundant or even insulting. 

If your professor has assigned this, go to **www.mymanagementlab.com** to complete the **Try It!** Simulation: _Leadership_ and get a better understanding of the challenges of leading in organizations. 

leader–member exchange theory (LMX) 

The leadership theory that says leaders create in-groups and out-groups and those in the in-group will have higher performance ratings, less turnover, and greater job satisfaction 

**==> picture [88 x 36] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
FYI<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


- 92 percent of executives see favoritism in who gets job promotions.[26] 

CONTEMPORARY **views of leadership** —_ **LO16.4** What are the latest views of leadership? We want to look at four of these views: leader–member exchange theory, transformational-transactional leadership, charismatic-visionary leadership, and team leadership. 

## **Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Theory** 

Have you ever been in a group in which the leader had “favorites” who made up his or her in-group? If so, that’s the premise behind leader–member exchange (LMX) theory.[25] **Leader–member exchange theory (LMX)** says leaders create in-groups and out-groups, and those in the in-group will have higher performance ratings, less turnover, and greater job satisfaction. 

LMX theory suggests that early on in the relationship between a leader and a given follower, a leader will implicitly categorize a follower as an “in” or as an “out.” That relationship tends to remain fairly stable over time. Leaders also encourage LMX by rewarding those employees with whom they want a closer linkage and punishing those with whom they do not.[27] For the LMX relationship to remain intact, however, both the leader and the follower must “invest” in the relationship. 

It’s not exactly clear how a leader chooses who falls into each category, but evidence shows that in-group members have demographic, attitude, personality, and even gender similarities with the leader or they have a higher level of competence than outgroup members.[28] The leader does the choosing, but the follower’s characteristics drive the decision. 

Research on LMX has been generally supportive. It appears that leaders do differentiate among followers; that these disparities are not random; and followers with in-group status will have higher performance ratings, engage in more helping or “citizenship” behaviors at work, and report greater satisfaction with their boss.[29] A recent LMX study found that leaders who establish a supportive relationship with key subordinates by providing emotional and other kinds of support generate organizational commitment on the part of these employees, which leads to increases in employee performance.[30] This probably shouldn’t be surprising since leaders invest their time and other resources in those whom they expect to perform best. 

## **Transformational-Transactional Leadership** 

## transactional leaders 

Leaders who lead primarily by using social exchanges (or transactions) 

## transformational leaders 

Leaders who stimulate and inspire (transform) followers to achieve extraordinary outcomes 

Many early leadership theories viewed leaders as **transactional leaders** ; that is, leaders who lead primarily by using social exchanges (or transactions). Transactional leaders guide or motivate followers to work toward established goals by exchanging rewards for their productivity.[31] But another type of leader—a **transformational leader** —stimulates and inspires (transforms) followers to achieve extraordinary outcomes. Examples include Jim Goodnight of SAS Institute and Denise Morrison of Campbell Soup Company. They pay attention to the concerns and developmental needs of individual followers; they change followers’ awareness of issues by helping those followers look at old problems in new ways; and they are able to excite, arouse, and inspire followers to exert extra effort to achieve group goals. 

**Chapter 16** Leadership **565** 

Transactional and transformational leadership shouldn’t be viewed as opposing approaches to getting things done.[33] Transformational leadership develops from transactional leadership. Transformational leadership produces levels of employee effort and performance that go beyond what would occur with a transactional approach alone. Moreover, transformational leadership is more than charisma because the transformational leader attempts to instill in followers the ability to question not only established views but also those views held by the leader.[34] 

The evidence supporting the superiority of transformational leadership over transactional leadership is overwhelmingly impressive. For instance, studies that looked at managers in different settings, including the military and business, found that transformational leaders were evaluated as more effective, higher performers, more promotable than their transactional counterparts, and more interpersonally sensitive.[35] In addition, evidence indicates that transformational leadership is strongly correlated with lower turnover rates and higher levels of productivity, employee satisfaction, creativity, goal attainment, follower well-being, and corporate entrepreneurship, especially in start-up firms.[36] 

## **Charismatic-Visionary Leadership** 

## **LEADER** making a **DIFFERENCE** 

Over the past several years, the Cleveland Clinic has experienced tremendous growth under the leadership of **Dr. Delos “Toby” Cosgrove** .[32] The i nonprofit health care organization now has nearly 50,000 employees and locations around the world including Ohio, Florida, Nevada, Ontario, and Abu Dhabi. Since Cosgrove stepped up as CEO, the organization has almost doubled in size, experienced increased patient satisfaction, and improved overall clinical outcomes. 

Cosgrove joined the Cleveland Clinic as a surgeon in 1975 and became CEO in 2004. Earning a Bronze Star as a surgeon in the Vietnam War, Cosgrove clearly is at the top of his profession, having performed 22,000 surgeries over his career and published more than 450 articles. He acknowledges, however, that while technical knowledge and expertise are important, effective leaders must possess other characteristics such as honesty, humility, listening skills, and respect for others. 

Cosgrove believes leaders should create workplaces that encourage continual learning. He sets the example for lifelong learning by continuing to grow personally as a leader. While talking to some medical students shortly after taking on the CEO role, he realized he needed to be more empathetic toward patients and their experience. As a result, he initiated Patients First, a system-wide effort to view care from the patient’s viewpoint, prioritizing not only taking care of a patient’s physical body, but also the patient’s mind and spirit. What can you learn from this leader making a difference? 

Jeff Bezos, founder and CEO of Amazon.com, 

is a person who exudes energy, enthusiasm, and drive.[37] He’s fun loving (his legendary laugh has been described as a flock of Canada geese on nitrous oxide), but he has pursued his vision for Amazon with serious intensity and has demonstrated an ability to inspire his employees through the ups and downs of a rapidly growing company. Bezos is what we call a **charismatic leader** —that is, an enthusiastic, self-confident leader whose personality and actions influence people to behave in certain ways. 

Several authors have attempted to identify personal characteristics of the charismatic leader.[38] The most comprehensive analysis identified five such characteristics: they have a vision, the ability to articulate that vision, a willingness to take risks to achieve that vision, a sensitivity to both environmental constraints and follower needs, and behaviors that are out of the ordinary.[39] For example, Kat Cole, group president of FOCUS Brands, is an example of a charismatic leader. When asked about her leadership, Cole said that “Leadership is believing in the future, yourself, others, and in a higher purpose. It’s about building culture, courage, and confidence through your actions and words and building teams that work to achieve common goals.”[40] 

## charismatic leader 

whose personality and actions influence people to behave in certain ways 

An increasing body of evidence shows impressive correlations between charismatic leadership and high performance and satisfaction among followers.[41] Although one study found that charismatic CEOs had no impact on subsequent organizational performance, charisma is still believed to be a desirable leadership quality.[42] 

If charisma is desirable, can people learn to be charismatic leaders? Or are charismatic leaders born with their qualities? Although a small number of experts still think that charisma can’t be learned, most believe that individuals can be trained to 

**566** _**Part 5**_ Leading 

## FYI 

- A 60 percent increase in leadership ratings is what executives saw after they had been trained in charismatic tactics.[44] 

## visionary leadership 

The ability to create and articulate a realistic, credible, and attractive vision of the future that improves upon the present situation 

exhibit charismatic behaviors.[43] For example, researchers have succeeded in teaching undergraduate students to “be” charismatic. How? They were taught to articulate a far-reaching goal, communicate high performance expectations, exhibit confidence in the ability of subordinates to meet those expectations, and empathize with the needs of their subordinates; they learned to project a powerful, confident, and dynamic presence; and they practiced using a captivating and engaging voice tone. The researchers also trained the student leaders to use charismatic nonverbal behaviors, including leaning toward the follower when communicating, maintaining direct eye contact, and having a relaxed posture and animated facial expressions. In groups with these “trained” charismatic leaders, members had higher task performance, higher task adjustment, and better adjustment to the leader and to the group than did group members who worked in groups led by noncharismatic leaders. 

One last thing we should say about charismatic leadership is that it may not always be necessary to achieve high levels of employee performance. It may be most appropriate when the follower’s task has an ideological purpose or when the environment involves a high degree of stress and uncertainty.[45] This distinction may explain why, when charismatic leaders surface, it’s more likely to be in politics, religion, or wartime, or when a business firm is starting up or facing a survival crisis. For example, Martin Luther King Jr. used his charisma to bring about social equality through nonviolent means, and Steve Jobs achieved unwavering loyalty and commitment from Apple’s technical staff in the early 1980s by articulating a vision of personal computers that would dramatically change the way people lived. 

Although the term _vision_ is often linked with charismatic leadership, **visionary leadership** is different; it’s the ability to create and articulate a realistic, credible, and attractive vision of the future that improves on the present situation.[46] This vision, if properly selected and implemented, is so energizing that it “in effect jump-starts the future by calling forth the skills, talents, and resources to make it happen.”[47] 

An organization’s vision should offer clear and compelling imagery that taps into people’s emotions and inspires enthusiasm to pursue the organization’s goals. It should be able to generate possibilities that are inspirational and unique and offer new ways of doing things that are clearly better for the organization and its members. Visions that are clearly articulated and have powerful imagery are easily grasped and accepted. For instance, Jack Ma cofounded Alibaba with the vision of helping small and large Chinese firms do business anywhere in the world. Alibaba has become the world’s largest e-commerce company under Ma’s visionary leadership. LEGO’s founder, Ole Kirk Kristiansen, wanted to invent innovative toys that would stimulate children’s creativity. His leadership set the tone for LEGO to become one of today’s most successful toy businesses.[48] 

## **Authentic Leadership** 

Anand Mahindra, CEO of the Indian multinational Mahindra Group, cites his father as a role model in the importance of empathy for leaders. In Mahindra’s words, “true empathy is rooted in humility and the understanding that there are many people with as much to contribute in life as you.” He believes that leaders must instill empathy and act in accordance with their values to influence the behavior of others. As head of a conglomerate operating in 100 countries, Mahindra demonstrates transparency in his management style and champions the innovative ideas of talented young employees who can make a difference.[49] 

## authentic leadership 

Leaders who know who they are, know what they believe in, and act on those values and beliefs openly and candidly 

Authentic leadership focuses on the moral aspects of being a leader. **Authentic leaders** know who they are, know what they believe in, and act on those values and beliefs openly and candidly.[50] For instance, Raymond Davis, CEO of Umpqua Bank, said, “I always tell our people that they’re entitled to get answers to every question they have. . . . That doesn’t mean they’re going to like the answers. . . .”[51] 

**Chapter 16** Leadership **567** 

## **Ethical Leadership** 

Shortly after becoming CEO of General Motors, Mary Barra faced a character-defining choice: Should she take responsibility for the company’s installation of faulty ignition switches in millions of vehicles even though she was not CEO at the time? Barra chose to take the high road: “I want to start by saying how sorry personally and how sorry General Motors is for what has happened.”[52] She then appointed Jeff Boyer as the vice president of global safety. Barra said that “If there are any obstacles in his way, Jeff has the authority to clear them. If he needs any additional resources, he will get them.”[53] Mary Barra is an example of an ethical leader because she is placing public safety ahead of profits. She is holding culpable employees accountable, and she stands behind her employees by creating a culture in which they feel that they could and should do a better job. 

## **Team Leadership** 

Because leadership is increasingly taking place within a team context and more organizations are using work teams, the role of the leader in guiding team members has become increasingly important. The role of team leader _is_ different from the traditional leadership role, as J. D. Bryant, a supervisor at Texas Instruments’ Forest Lane plant in Dallas, discovered. One day he was contentedly overseeing a staff of 15 circuit board assemblers. The next day, he was told that the company was going to use employee teams and he was to become a “facilitator.” He said, “I’m supposed to teach the teams everything I know and then let them make their own decisions.” Confused about his new role, he admitted, “There was no clear plan on what I was supposed to do.”[54] What _is_ involved in being a team leader? 

Many leaders are not equipped to handle the change to employee teams. As one consultant noted, “Even the most capable managers have trouble making the transition because all the command-and-control type things they were encouraged to do before are no longer appropriate. There’s no reason to have any skill or sense of this.”[55] This same consultant estimated that “probably 15 percent of managers are natural team leaders; another 15 percent could never lead a team because it runs counter to their personality—that is, they’re unable to sublimate their dominating style for the good of the team. Then there’s that huge group in the middle: Team leadership doesn’t come naturally to them, but they can learn it.”[56] 

Janay Everett (left) is a marketing field team leader for Whole Foods Market, a company that is organized around employee teams. Her job requires the skills of building and maintaining good relationships with store leaders, department team leaders, and team members at several different locations. She collaborates and communicates with store leadership in developing marketing plans that achieve store-specific sales and growth goals. Source: Zuma Press Inc./Alamy 

The challenge for many managers is learning how to become an effective team leader. They have to learn skills such as patiently sharing information, and being able to trust others and to give up authority. For example, Raphaël Gorgé, chairman and CEO of Groupe Gorgé, a French high-tech company, embraces these practices: “It is important to have self-confidence as a manager. I surround myself with highquality people who are far better than myself in their respective roles. I believe in putting together the best team possible and creating an ecosystem where individuals can strive.”[57] And effective team leaders have mastered the difficult balancing act of knowing when to leave their teams alone and when to get involved. For instance, Jane Rosenthal, founder of the Tribeca Film Festival, described her leadership style in the following way: “I’m hands-off until there’s a big problem, and then I’m completely hands-on. As long as I trust that everybody is doing what they’re supposed to do, it’s great.”[58] Do these leadership styles produce different results? Not always. For example, new team leaders may try to retain too much control at a time when team members need more autonomy, or they may abandon their teams at times when the teams need support and help.[59] 

One study looking at organizations that reorganized themselves around employee teams found certain common responsibilities of all leaders. These leader 

**568** _**Part 5**_ Leading 

## **Exhibit 16-5** 

Team Leadership Roles 

**==> picture [145 x 122] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Liaison with<br>Coach External<br>Constituencies<br>Team Leader<br>Roles<br>a<br>Conflict<br>Troubleshooter<br>Manager<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


responsibilities included coaching, facilitating, handling disciplinary problems, reviewing team and individual performance, training, and communication.[60] However, a more meaningful way to describe the team leader’s job is to focus on two priorities: (1) managing the team’s external boundary and (2) facilitating the team process.[61] These priorities entail four specific leadership roles, which are identified in Exhibit 16-5. 

## **Watch It! 2** 

If your professor has assigned this, go to **www.mymanagementlab.com** to watch a video titled: _Herman Miller: Motivation, Leadership & Teamwork_ and to respond to questions. 

> **let’s get** REAL The Scenario: Brianna Porter is struggling with her role as a team leader at a nonprofit organization that provides support programs for at-risk youth in her community. She recently was promoted to lead a team of fundraisers that reach out to local businesses and wealthy individuals to secure the funding that keeps the **Kevin Krossber** organization running. She initially took a Director of Operations “hands-off” approach and encouraged her staff to make their own decisions on who to target for donations. But now donations are declining and she knows she needs to intervene. **What advice can you give Brianna on how to be supportive of her team?** Knowing what you want accomplished may seem clear to you but it is even more important that your team shares that same vision. You won’t all be working toward the same goal if your team does not understand how to accomplish the goal. Make the effort to be involved, meet with your staff, and provide clear direction on how to be successful so your team can be confident with their ability to do what is expected of them. If you expect your team to work hard to produce quality results, you must lead by example to show them it can be done. - ; 

**Chapter 16** Leadership **569** 

## LEADERSHIP **issues in the twenty-first century** 

**LO16.5** It’s not easy being a chief information officer (CIO) today. The person responsible for managing a company’s information technology activities will find that the task comes with a lot of external and internal pressures. Technology continues to change rapidly—almost daily, it sometimes seems. Business costs continue to rise. Mazen Chilet, CIO of Abu Dhabi University, leads the team enhancing the student experience through on-demand digital access to university resources and a mobile app for downloading forms and checking grades. Chilet is an effective leader in this fast-changing environment, working cooperatively with colleagues, listening carefully to students, and communicating clearly about plans for new technology.[62] 

Leading effectively in today’s environment is likely to involve such challenging circumstances for many leaders. In addition, twenty-first-century leaders do face some important leadership issues. In this section, we look at these issues, which include managing power, developing trust, empowering employees, leading across cultures, and becoming an effective leader. 

## **Managing Power** 

Where do leaders get their power—that is, their right and capacity to influence work actions or decisions? Five sources of leader power have been identified: legitimate, coercive, reward, expert, and referent.[63] 

**Legitimate power** and authority are the same. Legitimate power represents the power a leader has as a result of his or her position in the organization. Although people in positions of authority are also likely to have reward and coercive power, legitimate power is broader than the power to coerce and reward. 

**Coercive power** is the power a leader has to punish or control. Followers react to this power out of fear of the negative results that might occur if they don’t comply. Managers typically have some coercive power, such as being able to suspend or demote employees or to assign them work they find unpleasant or undesirable. 

**Reward power** is the power to give positive rewards. A reward can be anything a person values, such as money, favorable performance appraisals, promotions, interesting work assignments, friendly colleagues, and preferred work shifts or sales territories. 

**Expert power** is power based on expertise, special skills, or knowledge. If an employee has skills, knowledge, or expertise that’s critical to a work group, that person’s expert power is enhanced. 

Finally, **referent power** is the power that arises because of a person’s desirable resources or personal traits. If I admire you and want to be associated with you, you can exercise power over me because I want to please you. Referent power develops out of admiration of another and a desire to be like that person. 

## legitimate power 

The power a leader has as a result of his or her position in the organization 

## coercive power 

The power a leader has to punish or control 

## reward power 

The power a leader has to give positive rewards 

## expert power 

Power that’s based on expertise, special skills, or knowledge 

## referent power 

Power that arises because of a person’s desirable resources or personal traits 

Most effective leaders rely on several different forms of power to affect the behavior and performance of their followers. For example, the commanding officer of one of Australia’s state-of-the-art submarines, the HMAS _Sheean_ , employs different types of power in managing his crew and equipment. He gives orders to the crew (legitimate), praises them (reward), and disciplines those who commit infractions (coercive). As an effective leader, he also strives to have expert power (based on his expertise and knowledge) and referent power (based on his being admired) to influence his crew. 

**570** _**Part 5**_ Leading 

## WORKPLACE CONFIDENTIAL 

## **A Micromanaging Boss** 

Micromanaging has been described as “probably the most common complaint about a boss.” What exactly is _micromanaging_ , and what can you do if you find yourself working for a micromanager? 

A micromanaging boss is someone who wants to control every particular, down to the smallest detail, of your work. For you, it can be very frustrating, stressful, and demoralizing. What are some signs that your boss may be micromanaging you? He checks on your progress multiple times a day; asks for frequent updates; tells you how to complete tasks; is obsessed with meaningless details; or becomes irritated if you make a decision without consulting him first. But just because your boss monitors your work doesn’t mean he’s a micromanager. Every manager has a responsibility for controlling activities for which he or she is responsible. And good managers are detail oriented. The difference is that micromanagers obsess on details, lose sight of priorities, and behave as if they don’t trust you. Good managers, on the other hand, understand the value of delegation. Unfortunately, you might not always have one of these. 

There’s a long list of reasons why your boss might be micromanaging you. That list would include insecurity, lack of trust in others, risk aversion, or lack of confidence in your ability. Additionally, other reasons might be having too little to do, thinking he or she is being helpful, or just being a control freak. 

_Self-assessment_ . If you feel that your boss is micromanaging you, the place to start is with self-assessment. Ask yourself: “Is it _me_ ?” Is there any reason your boss might feel the need to micromanage? For instance, have you shown up late to work? Have you missed some deadlines? Have you been distracted at work lately? Have you made mistakes that have reflected negatively on your boss? Start your assessment by making sure that your boss’s behavior isn’t rational and reasonable. 

_New to the job_ . The next question to ask is are either you or your boss new on the job? If you’re new, your boss may just be temporarily monitoring your work until he or she is confident of your ability and you prove yourself. If your boss is new, either to her current position or in her first managerial position, you will want to give her some slack as she adjusts. Micromanaging is not uncommon among new managers who, with little experience, are fearful of delegation and being held accountable for results. And experienced managers, in a new position, may be overly controlling until they’re 

confident of your abilities. So if either you or your boss is new, you might want to give it some time. 

_Changing conditions_ . A final step before you take any action should be to assess whether conditions have changed. If your boss’s micromanaging behavior is a change from her past behavior, consider whether it might be justified by changing conditions. Is your organization going through layoffs? Is there a major reorganization going on? Has your boss been given additional projects with pressing deadlines? Has your boss got a new boss? Any of these types of conditions can increase stress and lead your boss to micromanaging. If the conditions creating stress are temporary, her strong oversight behavior may be just short term. 

_Talk to your boss_ . If you’ve come to the conclusion that your boss’s behavior isn’t temporary and it’s creating difficulties for you to do your job properly, you and your boss need to talk. 

It’s very possible your boss is unaware that there’s a problem. In a nonconfrontational voice, specifically explain how his oversight is impacting your work, creating stress, and making it harder for you to perform at your full capabilities. You want to show him that you’ve got things under control and that you know what his expectations are. 

_Keep your boss updated_ . In addition to talking to your boss, you want to alleviate any concerns she might have that work isn’t being done correctly or that she might be unable to answer questions about your work progress. This is best achieved by regularly updating her on your work’s status. No boss likes surprises, especially ones that might reflect negatively on her management skills. This can best be achieved by proactively providing your boss with updates before they’re requested. 

_Reinforce your boss’s positive behaviors_ . When your boss leaves you alone, let her know you appreciate her hands-off approach. Thank her for trusting you. By positively reinforcing her trust, you increase the probability that she’ll demonstrate more of that behavior. Over time, when combined with your regular updates and your solid performance, you’re very likely to see a decline in the micromanaging behavior. 

_Sources:_ Based on R.D. White, “The Micromanagement Disease: Symptoms, Diagnosis, and Cure,” _Public Personnel Management,_ Spring 2010, pp. 71-76; G. Campbell, “Confronting Micromanaging Bosses,” _Nursing Management,_ September 2010, p. 56; Amy Gallo, “Stop Being Micromanaged,” hbr.org, September 2011; and P. Ganeshan-Singh, “7 Ways to Survive Working for a Micromanaging Boss,” payscale.com, October 29, 2014. 

**Chapter 16** Leadership **571** 

## **Developing Trust** 

If you looked back at each chapter’s Leader Making a Difference box, you’d see an amazing group of leaders who not only excel at leading their organizations but also have a strong trusting relationship with their employees. In today’s uncertain environment, an important consideration for leaders is building trust and credibility, both of which can be extremely fragile. Before we can discuss ways leaders can build trust and credibility, we have to know what trust and credibility are and why they’re so important. 

The main component of credibility is honesty. Surveys show that honesty is consistently singled out as the number one characteristic of admired leaders. “Honesty is absolutely essential to leadership. If people are going to follow someone willingly, whether it be into battle or into the boardroom, they first want to assure themselves that the person is worthy of their trust.”[65] In addition to being honest, credible leaders are competent and inspiring. They are personally able to effectively communicate their confidence and enthusiasm. Thus, followers judge a leader’s **credibility** in terms of his or her honesty, competence, and ability to inspire. 

Trust is closely entwined with the concept of credibility, and, in fact, the terms are often used interchangeably. **Trust** is defined as the belief in the integrity, character, and ability of a leader. Followers who trust a leader are willing to be vulnerable to the leader’s actions because they are confident that their rights and interests will not be abused.[66] Research has identified five dimensions that make up the concept of trust:[67] 

## FYI 

- 60 percent of people trust a stranger more than their boss.[64] 

## credibility 

The degree to which followers perceive someone as honest, competent, and able to inspire 

## trust 

The belief in the integrity, character, and ability of a leader 

- _Integrity:_ honesty and truthfulness 

- _Competence:_ technical and interpersonal knowledge and skills 

- _Consistency:_ reliability, predictability, and good judgment in handling situations 

- _Loyalty:_ willingness to protect a person, physically and emotionally 

- _Openness:_ willingness to share ideas and information freely 

Of these five dimensions, integrity seems to be the most critical when someone assesses another’s trustworthiness.[68] Both integrity and competence were seen in our earlier discussion of leadership traits found to be consistently associated with leadership. Workplace changes have reinforced why such leadership qualities are important. 

## **let’s get** 

## REAL 

## The Scenario: 

Adhita Chopra is stumped. Three months ago, he was assigned to lead a team of phone app designers, and although no one has come out and said anything directly, he feels like his team doesn’t trust him. They have been withholding information and communicating only selectively when asked questions. And they have persistently questioned the team’s goals and strategies and even Adhita’s actions and decisions. How can he build trust with his team? 

**Matt Ramos** Director of Marketing 

## **What advice would you give Adhita?** 

Trust in the workplace is always a tricky subject. I’ve seen a similar situation unfold once before. If Adhita feels this, but hasn’t heard it directly, he’s probably right. Earning trust at work comes down to three things: being good at what you do, being passionate about your work and the people around you, and having the ability to listen and follow through. Adhita should make sure he’s producing top-notch work and set up weekly one-on-one meetings with the team. Hard work and careful listening will see Adhita through this. 

**572** _**Part 5**_ Leading 

## **Exhibit 16-6** 

Building Trust 

**==> picture [322 x 93] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Practice openness. Show consistency.<br>er ;<br>Be fair. F ulfill your promises.<br>—_—__ BUILDING -<br>TRUST<br>Speak your feelings. Maintain confidences.<br>_—__ ;<br>Tell the truth. Demonstrate competence.<br>—___ :<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


For instance, the trends toward empowerment and self-managed work teams have reduced many of the traditional control mechanisms used to monitor employees. If a work team is free to schedule its own work, evaluate its own performance, and even make its own hiring decisions, trust becomes critical. Employees have to trust managers to treat them fairly, and managers have to trust employees to conscientiously fulfill their responsibilities. 

Also, leaders have to increasingly lead others who may not be in their immediate work group or may even be physically separated—members of cross-functional or virtual teams, individuals who work for suppliers or customers, and perhaps even people who represent other organizations through strategic alliances. These situations don’t allow leaders the luxury of falling back on their formal positions for influence. Many of these relationships, in fact, are fluid and fleeting, so the ability to quickly develop trust and sustain that trust is crucial to the success of the relationship. 

Why is it important that followers trust their leaders? Research has shown that trust in leadership is significantly related to positive job outcomes including job performance, organizational citizenship behavior, job satisfaction, and organizational commitment.[69] Given the importance of trust to effective leadership, how can leaders build trust? Exhibit 16-6 lists some suggestions. (Also, see the Building Your Skill exercise in Chapter 5.)[70] 

Now, more than ever, managerial and leadership effectiveness depends on the ability to gain the trust of followers.[71] Downsizing, financial challenges, and the increased use of temporary employees have undermined employees’ 1 trust in their leaders and shaken the confidence of investors, suppliers, and customers. Today’s leaders are faced with the challenge of rebuilding and restoring trust with employees and with other important organizational stakeholders. 

## **Empowering Employees** 

Employee empowerment is part of the peopleoriented culture at W. L. Gore & Associates. The company encourages individuals and work teams to take ownership in their jobs by using their talents and abilities in finding the best ways to get things done and to achieve company goals. Empowered employees feel they are trusted, respected, and valued contributors to their company’s success. Source: W. L. Gore/AP Images 

Employees at DuPont’s facility in Uberaba, Brazil, planted trees to commemorate the site’s 10th anniversary. Although they had several things to celebrate, one of the most important was the fact that since production began, the facility has had zero environmental incidents and no recordable safety violations. The primary reason for this achievement was the company’s implementation of STOP (Safety Training Observation Program)—a program in 

which empowered employees were responsible for observing one another, correcting improper procedures, and encouraging safe procedures.[72] 

As we’ve described in different places throughout the text, managers are increasingly leading by empowering their employees. As we’ve said before, empowerment involves increasing the decision-making discretion of workers. Millions of individual employees and employee teams are making the key operating decisions that directly affect their work. They’re developing budgets, scheduling workloads, controlling inventories, solving quality problems, and engaging in similar activities that until very 

**Chapter 16** Leadership **573** 

recently were viewed exclusively as part of the manager’s job.[73] For instance, at The Container Store, any employee who gets a customer request has permission to take care of it. Garret Boone, chairman emeritus, says, “Everybody we hire, we hire as a leader. Anybody in our store can take an action that you might think of typically being a manager’s action.”[74] 

One reason more companies are empowering employees is the need for quick decisions by those people who are most knowledgeable about the issues—often those at lower organizational levels. If organizations want to successfully compete in a dynamic global economy, employees have to be able to make decisions and implement changes quickly. Another reason is that organizational downsizings left many managers with larger spans of control. In order to cope with the increased work demands, managers had to empower their people. Although empowerment is not a universal answer, it can be beneficial when employees have the knowledge, skills, and experience to do their jobs competently. 

## **Leading Across Cultures** 

“In the United States, leaders are expected to look great, sound great, and be inspiring. In other countries—not so much.”[75] In this global economy, how can managers account for cross-cultural differences as they lead? 

One general conclusion that surfaces from leadership research is that effective leaders do not use a single style. They adjust their style to the situation. Although not mentioned explicitly, national culture is certainly an important situational variable in determining which leadership style will be most effective. What works in the United States, for instance, isn’t likely to be effective in Denmark. Lars Sørensen, CEO of pharmaceutical company Novo Nordisk, knows from experience that effective leadership is contextual. In Denmark, he leads by consensus on all decisions. When he leads his U.S. team, he takes on an aggressive top-down approach.[76] 

National culture affects leadership style because it influences how followers will respond. Leaders can’t (and shouldn’t) just choose their styles randomly. They’re constrained by the cultural conditions their followers have come to expect. Exhibit 16-7 provides some findings from selected examples of cross-cultural leadership studies. 

- Korean leaders are expected to be paternalistic toward employees. 

**Exhibit 16-7** Cross-Cultural Leadership 

- Arab leaders who show kindness or generosity without being asked to do so are seen by other Arabs as weak. 

- Chinese leaders are expected to stay positive when facing attacks. 

- European leaders are expected to be more action oriented. 

- Japanese leaders are expected to be humble and speak frequently. 

- Latin American leaders should not feel rejected when others behave formally. 

- Scandinavian and Dutch leaders who single out individuals with public praise are likely to embarrass, not energize, those individuals. 

- Effective leaders in Malaysia are expected to show compassion while using more of an autocratic than a participative style. 

- Effective German leaders are characterized by high performance orientation, low compassion, low self-protection, low team orientation, high autonomy, and high participation. 

- Effective leaders in Sub-Saharan Africa build deep relationships and close teamwork. 

_Sources:_ Based on “Leadership Across Cultures,” _Harvard Business Review_ , www.hbr.org, May 2015; J. C. Kennedy, “Leadership in Malaysia: Traditional Values, International Outlook,” _Academy of Management Executive_ , August 2002, pp. 15–17; F. C. Brodbeck, M. Frese, and M. Javidan, “Leadership Made in Germany: Low on Compassion, High on Performance,” _Academy of Management Executives_ , February 2002, pp. 16–29; M. F. Peterson and J. G. Hunt, “International Perspectives on International Leadership,” _Leadership Quarterly_ , Fall 1997, pp. 203–231; R. J. House and R. N. Aditya, “The Social Scientific Study of Leadership: Quo Vadis?” _Journal of Management_ , vol. 23, no. 3, 1997, p. 463; and R. J. House, “Leadership in the Twenty-First Century,” in _The Changing Nature of Work_ , ed. A Howard (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1995), p. 442. 

**574** _**Part 5**_ Leading 

## **FU T URE  V I S I O N** 

## **Flexible Leadership** 

As organizations become flatter (that is, fewer hierarchical levels) and more globally and technologically interconnected, old leadership models will become outdated. Although the three elements of leadership—the leader, the followers, and the situation—will still be part of the whole leadership equation, how these three elements interact to successfully accomplish a team’s mission and goals is changing. Successful leaders in tomorrow’s workplaces will need to be more like chameleons, adapting to complex and dynamic environments. Under these circumstances, leaders can do three things: (1) share responsibility and accountability by empowering employees; recognize that “leading” can come from anywhere and everywhere and that sometimes the best approach may be to step out of the way and let someone else take charge; (2) keep calm and stay focused in the midst of the fast pace and the uncertainty; when faced with such 

conditions, focus on the most important tasks at hand and present a confident demeanor when others may be panicking or at a loss as to what to do; and (3) be a leader who listens, encourages participation, recognizes that others’ needs are as important as your own, encourages and supports collaboration in achieving common goals—that is, a leader who puts people first. After all, without people, leaders are nothing. 

_If your professor has chosen to assign this, go to_ _**www.mymanagementlab.com** to discuss the following questions._ 

**TALK ABOUT IT 1:** Why are old leadership models becoming outdated? Oe **TALK ABOUT IT 2:** Without people, leaders are nothing. What does this mean? 

Because most leadership theories were developed in the United States, they have an American bias. They emphasize follower responsibilities rather than rights; assume self-gratification rather than commitment to duty or altruistic motivation; assume centrality of work and democratic value orientation; and stress rationality rather than spirituality, religion, or superstition.[77] However, the GLOBE research program, which we first introduced in Chapter 3, is the most extensive and comprehensive cross-cultural study of leadership ever undertaken. The GLOBE study found that leadership has some universal aspects. Specifically, a number of elements of transformational leadership appear to be associated with effective leadership regardless of what country the leader is in.[78] These elements include vision, foresight, providing encouragement, trustworthiness, dynamism, positiveness, and proactiveness. The results led two members of the GLOBE team to conclude that “effective business leaders in any country are expected by their subordinates to provide a powerful and proactive vision to guide the company into the future, strong motivational skills to stimulate all employees to fulfill the vision, and excellent planning skills to assist in implementing the vision.”[79] Some people suggest that the universal appeal of these transformational leader characteristics is due to the pressures toward common technologies and management practices as a result of global competitiveness and multinational influences. 

_**Leadership Transition**_ —If your instructor is using Pearson MyLab Management, log **It’s Your Career** onto **mymanagementlab.com** and test your _leadership transition knowledge._ **Be sure to refer back to the chapter opener!** 

## **Becoming an Effective Leader** 

Organizations need effective leaders. Two issues pertinent to becoming an effective leader are leader training and recognizing that sometimes being an effective leader means _not_ leading. Let’s take a look at these issues. 

**Chapter 16** Leadership **575** 

**LEADER TRAINING** Organizations around the globe spend billions of dollars, yen, and euros on leadership training and development. In the United States alone, it has been estimated that companies spend $70.6 billion a year on formal training and development.[80] These efforts take many forms—from $50,000 leadership programs offered by universities such as Harvard and organizations such as GE to sailing experiences at the Outward Bound School. Although much of the money spent on leader training may provide doubtful benefits, our review suggests that managers can do some things to get the maximum effect from such training.[81] Still, there is some consensus about characteristics of effective leadership training. One is contextualization (ensuring that learning is set in the strategy and culture of the organization), and another is personalization (enabling participants to seek out learning related to their aspirations).[82] 

First, let’s recognize the obvious. Some people don’t have what it takes to be a leader. Period. For instance, evidence indicates that leadership training is more likely to be successful with individuals who are high self-monitors rather than with low selfmonitors. Such individuals have the flexibility to change their behavior as different situations may require. In addition, organizations may find that individuals with higher levels of a trait called motivation to lead are more receptive to leadership development opportunities.[84] 

What kinds of things can individuals learn that might be related to being a more effective leader? It may be a bit optimistic to think that “vision-creation” can be taught, but implementation skills can be taught. People can be trained to develop “an understanding about content themes critical to effective visions.”[85] We can also teach skills such as trust-building and mentoring. And leaders can be taught situational analysis skills. They can learn how to evaluate situations, how to modify situations to make them fit better with their style, and how to assess which leader behaviors might be most effective in given situations. 

**SUBSTITUTES FOR LEADERSHIP** Despite the belief that some leadership style will always be effective regardless of the situation, leadership may not always be important! Research indicates that, in some situations, any behaviors a leader exhibits are irrelevant. In other words, certain individual, job, and organizational variables can act as “substitutes for leadership,” negating the influence of the leader.[86] 

For instance, follower characteristics such as experience, training, professional orientation, or need for independence can neutralize the effect of leadership. These characteristics can replace the employee’s need for a leader’s support or ability to create structure and reduce task ambiguity. Similarly, jobs that are inherently unambiguous and routine or intrinsically satisfying may place fewer demands on leaders. Finally, such organizational characteristics as explicit formalized goals, rigid rules and procedures, or cohesive work groups can substitute for formal leadership. 

Global executive leadership programs at Ford Motor Company develop effective leaders such as Mark Fields, a 25-year Ford employee who leads the company as CEO and president. Ford offers a wide range of leadership development programs for employees at all levels that focus on fostering functional and technical excellence, risk taking, decision making, managing change, and entrepreneurial thinking. Source: Paul Warner, Contributor/Getty Images Entertainment/Getty Images 

## FYI 

The percentage of women in leadership positions varies by country: 

- 45 percent in Russia. 

- 39 percent in the Philippines and Lithuania. 

- 37 percent in Estonia. 

- 16 percent in India. 

- 15 percent in Germany. 

- 7 percent in Japan.[83] 

**576** _**Part 5**_ Leading 

## Chapter 16 

## **PREPARING FOR: Exams/Quizzes** 

## CHAPTER SUMMARY **by Learning Objectives** 

## **LO16.1** 

## DEFINE leader and leadership. 

A leader is someone who can influence others and who has managerial authority. Leadership is a process of leading a group and influencing that group to achieve its goals. Managers should be leaders because leading is one of the four management functions. 

## **LO16.2** 

## COMPARE and contrast early theories of leadership. 

Early attempts to define leader traits were unsuccessful, although later attempts found eight traits associated with leadership. 

The University of Iowa studies explored three leadership styles. The only conclusion was that group members were more satisfied under a democratic leader than under an autocratic one. The Ohio State studies identified two dimensions of leader behavior—initiating structure and consideration. A leader high in both those dimensions at times achieved high group task performance and high group member satisfaction, but not always. The University of Michigan studies looked at employee-oriented leaders and production-oriented leaders. They concluded that leaders who were employee oriented could get high group productivity and high group member satisfaction. The managerial grid looked at leaders’ concern for production and concern for people and identified five leader styles. Although it suggested that a leader who was high in concern for production and high in concern for people was the best, there was no substantive evidence for that conclusion. 

As the behavioral studies showed, a leader’s behavior has a dual nature: a focus on the task and a focus on the people. 

## **LO16.3** 

## DESCRIBE the three major contingency theories of leadership. 

Fiedler’s model attempted to define the best style to use in particular situations. He measured leader style—relationship oriented or task oriented—using the leastpreferred coworker questionnaire. Fiedler also assumed a leader’s style was fixed. He measured three contingency dimensions: leader–member relations, task structure, and position power. The model suggests that task-oriented leaders performed best in very favorable and very unfavorable situations, and relationship-oriented leaders performed best in moderately favorable situations. 

Hersey and Blanchard’s situational leadership theory focused on followers’ readiness. They identified four leadership styles: telling (high task–low relationship), selling (high task–high relationship), participating (low task–high relationship), and delegating (low task–low relationship). They also identified four stages of readiness: unable and unwilling (use telling style), unable but willing (use selling style), able but unwilling (use participative style), and able and willing (use delegating style). 

The path-goal model developed by Robert House identified four leadership behaviors: directive, supportive, participative, and achievement oriented. He assumed that a leader can and should be able to use any of these styles. The two situational contingency variables were found in the environment and in the follower. Essentially, the path-goal model says that a leader should provide direction and support as needed; that is, structure the path so the followers can achieve goals. 

**LO16.4** 

## DESCRIBE contemporary views of leadership. 

Leader–member exchange theory (LMX) says that leaders create in-groups and outgroups and those in the in-group will have higher performance ratings, less turnover, and greater job satisfaction. 

**Chapter 16** Leadership **577** 

A transactional leader exchanges rewards for productivity where a transformational leader stimulates and inspires followers to achieve goals. 

A charismatic leader is an enthusiastic and self-confident leader whose personality and actions influence people to behave in certain ways. People can learn to be charismatic. A visionary leader is able to create and articulate a realistic, credible, and attractive vision of the future. 

Authentic leadership focuses on the moral aspects of being a leader. Ethical leaders create a culture in which employees feel that they could and should do a better job. A team leader has two priorities: manage the team’s external boundary and facilitate the team process. Four leader roles are involved: liaison with external constituencies, troubleshooter, conflict manager, and coach. 

## **LO16.5** 

## DISCUSS 

The five sources of a leader’s power are legitimate (authority or position), coercive (punish or control), reward (give positive rewards), expert (special expertise, skills, or knowledge), and referent (desirable resources or traits). 

Today’s leaders face the issues of managing power, developing trust, empowering employees, leading across cultures, and becoming an effective leader. 

## Pearson MyLab Management 

Go to **mymanagementlab.com** to complete the problems marked with this icon . 

## REVIEW AND DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 

- 16-1.  What are the eight key traits associated with leadership that summarize the four main theories? 

- 16-2.  Briefly explain what a managerial grid is. 

- 16-3.  Explain Hersey and Blanchard’s situational leadership styles and the two key behaviors associated with it. 

- 16-4.  What is the purpose of a charismatic leader’s enthusiasm and self-confidence? 

   - 16-6.  Can a leader get power from multiple sources? Discuss. 

   - 16-7.  Do you think most managers in real life use a contingency approach to increase their leadership effectiveness? Explain. 

   - 16-8.  Do the followers make a difference in whether a leader is effective? Discuss. 

- 16-5.  You are a team leader. What are your daily priorities for your team? 

## Pearson MyLab Management 

If your professor has assigned these, go to **mymanagementlab.com** for the following Assisted-graded writing questions: 

**16-9.** Define leader and leadership and explain why managers should be leaders. 

**16-10.** Which source of leader’s power is most effective and why? 

**578** _**Part 5**_ Leading 

## **PREPARING FOR: My Career** ~~a~~ o PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENTS P I A eee 

PERSONAL INVENTORY ASSESSMENT 

## **Leadership Style Inventory** 

What’s your leadership style? Take this PIA and find out! 

## a) ETHICS DILEMMA 

Have you ever watched the show _Undercover Boss?_ It features a company’s “boss” working undercover in his or her own company to find out how the organization really works. Typically, the executive works undercover for a week, and then the employees the leader has worked with are summoned to company headquarters and either rewarded or punished for their actions. Bosses from organizations 

ranging from Waste Management and White Castle to NASCAR and Family Dollar have participated. 

- 16-11.  What do you think? Is it ethical for a leader to go undercover in his or her organization? Why or why not? 

- 16-12.  What ethical issues could arise? How could managers deal with those issues? 

## SKILLS EXERCISE **Developing Your Choosing an Effective Leadership Style Skill** 

## **About the Skill** 

Effective leaders are skillful at helping the groups they lead be successful as the group goes through various stages of development. No leadership style is consistently effective. Situational factors, including follower characteristics, must be taken into consideration in the selection of an effective leadership style. The key situational factors that determine leadership effectiveness include stage of group development, task structure, position power, leader–member relations, the work group, employee characteristics, organizational culture, and national culture. 

## **Steps in Practicing the Skill** 

You can choose an effective leadership style if you use the following six suggestions. 

- _**Determine the stage in which your group or team is**_ 

_**operating: forming, storming, norming, or performing.**_ Because each team stage involves specific and different issues and behaviors, it’s important to know in which stage your team is. _Forming_ is the first stage of group development, during which people join a group and then help define the group’s purpose, structure, and leadership. _Storming_ is the second stage, characterized by intragroup conflict. _Norming_ is the third stage, characterized by close relationships and cohesiveness. _Performing_ is the fourth stage, when the group is fully functional. 

- _**If your team is in the forming stage, you want to exhibit certain leader behaviors.**_ These include making certain that all team members are introduced to one another, 

answering member questions, working to establish a foundation of trust and openness, modeling the behaviors you expect from the team members, and clarifying the team’s goals, procedures, and expectations. 

- _**If your team is in the storming stage, you want to exhibit certain leader behaviors.**_ These behaviors include identifying sources of conflict and adopting a mediator role, encouraging a win-win philosophy, restating the team’s vision and its core values and goals, encouraging open discussion, encouraging an analysis of team processes in order to identify ways to improve, enhancing team cohesion and commitment, and providing recognition to individual team members as well as the team. 

- _**If your team is in the norming stage, you want to exhibit certain leader behaviors.**_ These behaviors include clarifying the team’s goals and expectations, providing performance feedback to individual team members and the team, encouraging the team to articulate a vision for the future, and finding ways to publicly and openly communicate the team’s vision. 

- _**If your team is in the performing stage, you want to exhibit certain leader behaviors.**_ These behaviors include providing regular and ongoing performance feedback, fostering innovation and innovative behavior, encouraging the team to capitalize on its strengths, celebrating achievements (large and small), and providing the team whatever support it needs to continue doing its work. 

**Chapter 16** Leadership **579** 

to exhibit? Give some specific examples of the types of leadership behaviors he or she used. Evaluate the leadership style. Was it appropriate for the group? Why or why not? What would you have done differently? Why? 

- _**Monitor the group for changes in behavior and adjust your leadership style accordingly.**_ Because a group is not a static entity, it will go through up periods and down periods. You should adjust your leadership style to the needs of the situation. If the group appears to need more direction from you, provide it. If it appears to be functioning at a high level on its own, provide whatever support is necessary to keep it functioning at that level. 

**2.** Observe a sports team (either college or professional) that you consider extremely successful and one that you would consider not successful. What leadership styles appear to be used in these team situations? Give some specific examples of the types of leadership behaviors you observe. How would you evaluate the leadership style? Was it appropriate for the team? Why or why not? To what degree do you think leadership style influenced the team’s outcomes? 

## **Practicing the Skill** 

The following suggestions are activities you can do to practice the behaviors in choosing an effective leadership style. 

**1.** Think of a group or team to which you currently belong or of which you have been a part. What type of leadership style did the leader of this group appear 

## WORKING TOGETHER **Team Exercise** 

So what really makes a good leader? Is it giving people the time and space to grow as individuals? Giving people that vital opportunity to make their own decisions? Or have individual responsibilities perhaps? Think of a leader you have encountered so far and recall what was good about 

them. Write down as many positives about your relationship with that leader. Share your thoughts with a small group of three or four members. Try to collate the ideal characteristics discussed. Once you’ve done this, share your ideas with the rest of the class. 

## MY TURN TO BE A MANAGER 

- Think of the different organizations to which you belong. Note the different styles of leadership used by the leaders in these organizations. Write a paper describing these individual’s style of leading (no names, please) and evaluate the styles being used. 

   - Here’s a list of leadership skills. Choose two and develop a training exercise that will help develop or improve that skill: building employee communities; building teams; coaching and motivating others; communicating with impact, confidence, and energy; leading by example; leading change; making decisions; providing direction and focus; and valuing diversity. 

- Write down three people you consider effective leaders. Make a bulleted list of the characteristics these individuals exhibit that you think make them effective leaders. 

   - Select one of the topics in the section on leadership issues in the twenty-first century. Do some additional research on the topic, and put your findings in a bulleted list that you are prepared to share in class. Be sure to cite your sources. 

- Think about the times you have had to lead. Describe your own personal leadership style. What could you do to improve your leadership style? Come up with an action plan of steps you can take. Put all this information into a brief paper. 

   - Interview three managers about what they think it takes to be a good leader. Write up your findings in a report and be prepared to present it in class. 

- Managers say that increasingly they must use influence to get things done. Do some research on the art of persuasion. Make a bulleted list of suggestions you find on how to improve your skills at influencing others. 

- Try out your leadership skills! Volunteer for a leadership position with an organization you are involved in. 

**==> picture [31 x 783] intentionally omitted <==**

**580** _**Part 5**_ Leading 

## CASE APPLICATION **1**[Indra Nooyi: An Inspiring ] Leader 

PepsiCo, Inc. is regarded as the second largest food and beverage business in the world, and a large part of the success of this multinational corporation can be attributed to its leader. Indra Nooyi, the Chairperson and CEO, is an inspiring and visionary leader for several reasons. First, she has been one of the first women outside America to become CEO of such a large multinational. Second, for over a decade, she has featured on Forbes magazine’s list of the 100 most influential women in the world. Third, Nooyi has been known to be an employee-oriented and a customer-oriented leader, with her innovative strategies inspiring and forging the way for women worldwide. 

Being particularly attentive to PepsiCo’s customers’ needs and preferences, Nooyi uses every occasion to better understand and improve the rapidly changing beverage patterns. In a recent business trip to China, she toured different cities in the region for ten days, closely studying the strategic market for PepsiCo. In an interview with David Rubenstein at Bloomberg, she shared a funny anecdote that confirms her attention to customers’ preferences—every time she is invited by a friend, she tries to find a way to go into the kitchen and look at what products they use every day (also hoping to find some products of the PepsiCo group). 

Nooyi is visionary in many of her decisions. In 2012, she decided to create a design team, headed by the Italian designer Mauro Porcini (former Head of Global Design at 3M), and assigned him the task of refreshing the company’s brand, rethink the shape of the bottles, and redesigning the vending machines. That was a pioneering decision in the food and drink industry at that time (now such decision has been imitated by competitors) and even people inside PepsiCo were unsure about the this decision at the beginning. However, this audacious choice revealed to be successful as the company could improve the top land bottom line and become more appealing among customers and restaurants. For example, the new fountain machine designed by the Design & Innovation Center, which enables customers to select their flavor coke from more than 1,000 combinations, has been a great success and one of the reason for which the restaurant chain Buffalo Wild Wings decided to switch from Coke to Pepsi in 2013. 

Nooyi is a supportive leader who makes of women’s innate caring attitude a big strength of her leadership style. For example, she conveys a deep sense of gratitude to all her employees for the effort and energy they put in the company. To express this feeling, she sometimes writes gratitude letters to the executive’s parents to let them know how well their sons or daughters are doing for PepsiCo and to give them credit for such amazing achievements. 

Notably, not forgetting her privileged condition of being a woman who has been able to break the highest glass ceiling in the company, Nooyi is fully committed to promote diversity and inclusion at all organizational levels. In 2010, the company launched a survey with women manager, who were good represented in middle-level management positions but very low represented in top-level positions to understand the reasons of such under-representation. Women confessed to lack self-confidence and to believe that men were more capable to make themselves noticeable in the company and cultivate high influential networks, something they were less good in doing. In response to this, PepsiCo created a leadership development program for women, called “Strategies for Success,” aimed at helping women boosting their self-confidence and guiding them in rising up through the organization. In just two years, women’s representation in senior positions in the operation team raised from 0 to 33 percent. 

When asked about her secret, Indra has no doubts: the family. She attributes most of her strength to her family and to teachings and example received by her parents. She recalls that in India, at the time she was an adolescent, the preoccupation of most parents was to find a husband for their daughters. Her parents were different in 

**Chapter 16** Leadership **581** 

many things, for instance supporting Nooyi’s decision to leave India for studying in the United States. Moreover, since her childhood, they sought to make her (and the sister) more confident and aware of their unique talents. A game that the mother was used to play with them during the dinners consisted of pretending that they became a President or a very important ministry of India and, every evening, they had to write a list of things that they would have done in such an important position. Albeit it was only a game, Nooyi confessed that it helped her a lot to boost her self-confidence and inform her leadership style and, probably, without that evening ritual she would have not been capable of achieving what she got today in her life- and being the so-highly loved leader she is.[87] 

## **DISCUSSION QUESTIONS** 

- 16-13.  What leadership models/theories/issues do you see in this case? List and describe. 

- 16-14.  What do you think about Indra Nooyi’s decision to create a design unit at PepsiCo? Is it appropriate for the food and drink industry? Why or why not? 

- 16-15.  How do you think leadership is changing in contemporary society? What behaviors exhibited by Indra Nooyi indicate such change? 

- 16-16.  What did the case teach you about leadership? 

## Leadership Development CASE APPLICATION **2** at L’Oréal 

Jean Paul Agon, the president and CEO of L’Oréal, joined the company right after his university graduation in 1978 and has continued to grow as a leader over his almost 40 years with the company.[88] Headquartered in France with more than 80,000 employees around the globe, L’Oréal is the world’s largest cosmetics company. Today, L’Oréal management still believes leadership development starts at the beginning of your career and continues throughout it. 

Each year almost 650 recent university graduates join one of L’Oréal’s management training programs. The format of each program varies based on geographic location, with trainees spending between 6 and 18 months taking on different missions throughout the organization to learn the business. Each trainee has a personal development plan that includes learning about the organization, understanding the business models utilized by the different brands, and developing relationships throughout the organization. The program immerses the trainee into the organizational culture and the trainee learns about what it takes to succeed in the work environment. Most trainees are also connected with a mentor to answer questions and provide guidance. 

A significant contributor to L’Oréal’s overall success is the cross-cultural awareness of managers who often lead diverse teams developing customized products for different regions of the world. While some of these leaders are recruited externally, many are developed through a specific international management training program that includes a 12-month rotation through Paris, New York, Singapore, and Rio. This program seeks out graduates who are curious and able to adapt to other cultures from international business schools, knowing this skill set is important to help tailor international brands to local markets. 

Doing business globally also requires ethical leadership, which is an important component of the firm’s leadership development. L’Oréal has been recognized for their efforts on the ethics front. In 2016, the Ethics & Compliance Initiative recognized 

**582** _**Part 5**_ Leading 

L’Oréal’s innovation in ethical leadership. The company was also named as one of the World’s Most Ethical Companies by Ethisphere. 

L’Oréal’s leadership development efforts do not stop with recent graduates. In fact, managers at all levels of the organization have the opportunity to further develop their leadership ability through a variety of programs. These programs are primarily based on coaching leaders and are offered with the belief that an investment in leaders goes farther as those leaders then develop their own teams. Managers throughout the organization are held accountable for the development of their employees. Those that fail at developing their own teams, even if they meet business outcomes, lose out on performance rewards. All this emphasizes this important point: Leadership matters at L’Oréal. 

## **DISCUSSION QUESTIONS** 

- 16-17.  Why do you think L’Oréal invests so much in leadership development? 

- 16-18.  What role does a mentor play in leadership development? 

- 16-19.  Why is cross-cultural awareness important for leaders at a company such as L’Oréal? 

- 16-20.  Do you think a management training program would be a good way to start a career with a company? Why or why not? 

## ENDNOTES 

1. Most leadership research has focused on the actions and responsibilities of managers and extrapolated the results to leaders and leadership in general. 

2. J. Pinsker, “The Financial Perks of Being Tall,” _The Atlantic_ online, www.theatlantic.com, May 18, 2015; T. A. Judge and D. M. Cable, “The Effect of Physical Height on Workplace Success and Income: Preliminary Test of a Theoretical Model,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , vol. 89, no. 3, 2004, pp. 428–441. 

3. See R. L. Schaumberg and F. J. Flynn, “Uneasy Lies the Head That Wears the Crown: The Link Between Guilt Proneness and Leadership,” _Journal of Personality and Social Psychology_ , August 2012, pp. 327–342; D. S. DeRue, J. D. Nahrgang, N. Wellman, and S. E. Humphrey, “Trait and Behavioral Theories of Leadership: An Integration and Meta-Analytic Test of Their Relative Validity,” _Personnel Psychology_ , Spring 2011, pp. 7–52; T. A. Judge, J. E. Bono, R. Ilies, and M. W. Gerhardt, “Personality and Leadership: A Qualitative and Quantitative Review,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , August 2002, pp. 765–780; and S. A. Kirkpatrick and E. A. Locke, “Leadership: Do Traits Matter?” _Academy of Management Executive_ , May 1991, pp. 48–60. 

4. R. Working, “Executive Qualities Differ by Gender, Study Finds,” www.hrcommunication.com, March 8, 2013. 

5. A. Bryant, “Carter Murray Giving Talented People Room to Bloom,” _The New York Times_ online, www.nytimes.com, May 13, 2016. 

6. N. Nayab, “A Review of Companies with Autocratic Leadership,” Bright Hub Project Management, online, www .brighthubpm.com, July 29, 2015. 

7. D. S. DeRue, J. D. Nahrgang, N. Wellman, and S. E. Humphrey, “Trait and Behavioral Theories of Leadership: An Integration and Meta-Analytic Test of Their Relative Validity.” 

8. K. Lewin and R. Lippitt, “An Experimental Approach to the Study of Autocracy and Democracy: A Preliminary Note,” _Sociometry_ , vol. 1, 1938, pp. 292–300; K. Lewin, “Field Theory and Experiment in Social Psychology: Concepts and Methods,” _American Journal of Sociology_ , vol. 44, 1939, pp. 868–896; K. Lewin, L. Lippitt, and R. K. White, “Patterns of Aggressive Behavior in Experimentally Created Social Climates,” _Journal of Social Psychology_ , vol. 10, 1939, pp. 271–301; and L. Lippitt, “An Experimental Study of the Effect of Democratic and Authoritarian Group Atmospheres,” _University of Iowa Studies in Child Welfare_ , vol. 16, 1940, pp. 43–95. 

9. B. M. Bass, _Stogdill’s Handbook of Leadership_ (New York: Free Press, 1981), pp. 289–299. 

10. R. M. Stogdill and A. E. Coons, eds., _Leader Behavior: Its Description and Measurement_ , Research Monograph no. 88 (Columbus: Ohio State University, Bureau of Business Research, 1951). For an updated literature review of Ohio State research, see S. Kerr, C. A. Schriesheim, 

   - C. J. Murphy, and R. M. Stogdill, “Toward a Contingency Theory of Leadership Based upon the Consideration and Initiating Structure Literature,” _Organizational Behavior and Human Performance_ , August 1974, pp. 62–82; and B. M. Fisher, “Consideration and Initiating Structure and Their Relationships with Leader Effectiveness: A Meta-Analysis,” in F. Hoy (ed.), _Proceedings of the 48th Annual Academy of Management Conference_ , Anaheim, California, 1988, pp. 201–205. 

11. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Medical and Health Services Managers,” _Occupational Outlook Handbook_ , _2016-17 Ed_ . 

12. “Why the Empathetic Leader Is the Best Leader,” www .success.com, April 21, 2014. 

13. R. Kahn and D. Katz, “Leadership Practices in Relation to Productivity and Morale,” in _Group Dynamics: Research and_ 

**Chapter 16** Leadership **583** 

_Theory_ , 2d ed., ed. D. Cartwright and A. Zander (Elmsford, NY: Row, Paterson, 1960). 

14. R. R. Blake and J. S. Mouton, _The Managerial Grid III_ (Houston: Gulf Publishing, 1984). 

15. L. L. Larson, J. G. Hunt, and R. N. Osborn, “The Great Hi-Hi Leader Behavior Myth: A Lesson from Occam’s Razor,” _Academy of Management Journal_ , December 1976, pp. 628–641; and P. C. Nystrom, “Managers and the Hi-Hi Leader Myth,” _Academy of Management Journal_ , June 1978, pp. 325–331. 

16. W. G. Bennis, “The Seven Ages of the Leader,” _Harvard Business Review_ , January 2004, p. 52. 

17. F. E. Fiedler, _A Theory of Leadership Effectiveness_ (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967). 

18. R. Ayman, M. M. Chemers, and F. Fiedler, “The Contingency Model of Leadership Effectiveness: Its Levels of Analysis,” _Leadership Quarterly_ , Summer 1995, pp. 147–167; C. A. Schriesheim, B. J. Tepper, and L. A. Tetrault, “Least Preferred Coworker Score, Situational Control, and Leadership Effectiveness: A Meta-Analysis of Contingency Model Performance Predictions,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , August 1994, pp. 561–573; and L. H. Peters, D. D. Hartke, and J. T. Pholmann, “Fiedler’s Contingency Theory of Leadership: An Application of the Meta-Analysis Procedures of Schmidt and Hunter,” _Psychological Bulletin_ , March 1985, pp. 274–285. 

19. See E. H. Schein, _Organizational Psychology_ , 3rd ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1980), pp. 116–117; and B. Kabanoff, “A Critique of Leader Match and Its Implications for Leadership Research,” _Personnel Psychology_ , Winter 1981, pp. 749–764. 

20. P. Hersey and K. Blanchard, “So You Want to Know Your Leadership Style?,” _Training and Development Journal_ , February 1974, pp. 1–15; and P. Hersey and K. H. Blanchard, _Management of Organizational Behavior: Leading Human Resources_ , 8th ed. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2001). 

21. See, for instance, E. G. Ralph, “Developing Managers’ Effectiveness: A Model with Potential,” _Journal of Management Inquiry_ , June 2004, pp. 152–163; C. L. Graeff, “Evolution of Situational Leadership Theory: A Critical Review,” _Leadership Quarterly_ , vol. 8, no. 2, 1997, pp. 153–170; and C. F. Fernandez and R. P. Vecchio, “Situational Leadership Theory Revisited: A Test of an Across-Jobs Perspective,” _Leadership Quarterly_ , vol. 8, no. 1, 1997, pp. 67–84. 

22. Ready-Now Leaders: 25 Findings to Meet Tomorrow’s Business Challenges,” The Conference Board and Development Dimensions International, www.ddiworld.org, 2014. 

23. R. J. House, “A Path-Goal Theory of Leader Effectiveness,” _Administrative Science Quarterly_ , September 1971, pp. 321–338; R. J. House and T. R. Mitchell, “Path-Goal Theory of Leadership,” _Journal of Contemporary Business_ , Autumn 1974, p. 86; and R. J. House, “Path-Goal Theory of Leadership: Lessons, Legacy, and a Reformulated Theory,” _Leadership Quarterly_ , Fall 1996, pp. 323–352. 

24. M. L. Dixon and L. K. Hart, “The Impact of Path-Goal Leadership Styles on Work Group Effectiveness and Turnover Intention,” _Journal of Managerial Issues_ , Spring 2010, pp. 52–69; J. C. Wofford and L. Z. Liska, “Path-Goal Theories of Leadership: A Meta-Analysis,” _Journal of Management_ , Winter 1993, pp. 857–876; and A. Sagie and 

   - M. Koslowsky, “Organizational Attitudes and Behaviors as a Function of Participation in Strategic and Tactical Change Decisions: An Application of Path-Goal Theory,” _Journal of Organizational Behavior_ , January 1994, pp. 37–47. 

25. R. M. Dienesch and R. C. Liden, “Leader–Member Exchange Model of Leadership: A Critique and Further Development,” _Academy of Management Review_ , July 1986, pp. 618–634; G. B. Graen and M. Uhl-Bien, “Relationship-Based Approach to Leadership: Development of Leader–Member Exchange (LMX) Theory of Leadership over 25 Years: Applying a Multi-Domain Perspective,” _Leadership Quarterly_ , Summer 1995, pp. 219–247; R. C. Liden, R. T. Sparrowe, and S. J. Wayne, “Leader–Member Exchange Theory: The Past and Potential for the Future,” in _Research in Personnel and Human Resource Management_ , vol. 15, ed. G. R. Ferris (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1997), pp. 47–119; and C. P. Schriesheim, S. L. Castro, X. Zhou, and F. J. Yammarino, “The Folly of Theorizing ‘A’ but Testing ‘B’: A Selective Level-of-Analysis Review of the Field and a Detailed Leader– Member Exchange Illustration,” _Leadership Quarterly_ , Winter 2001, pp. 515–551. 

26. P. Drexler, “The Upside of Favoritism,” _Wall Street Journal_ , June 8–9, 2013, p. C3. 

27. R. C. Liden and G. Graen, “Generalizability of the Vertical Dyad Linkage Model of Leadership,” _Academy of Management Journal_ , September 1980, pp. 451–465; R. C. Liden, S. J. Wayne, and D. Stilwell, “A Longitudinal Study of the Early Development of Leader–Member Exchanges,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , August 1993, pp. 662–674; S. J. Wayne, L. J. Shore, W. H. Bommer, and L. E. Tetrick, “The Role of Fair Treatment and Rewards in Perceptions of Organizational Support and Leader– Member Exchange,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , June 2002, pp. 590–598; and S. S. Masterson, K. Lewis, and B. M. Goldman, “Integrating Justice and Social Exchange: The Differing Effects of Fair Procedures and Treatment on Work Relationships,” _Academy of Management Journal_ , August 2000, pp. 738–748. 

28. D. Duchon, S. G. Green, and T. D. Taber, “Vertical Dyad Linkage: A Longitudinal Assessment of Antecedents, Measures, and Consequences,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , February 1986, pp. 56–60; R. C. Liden, S. J. Wayne, and D. Stilwell, “A Longitudinal Study of the Early Development of Leader–Member Exchanges”; M. Uhl-Bien, “Relationship Development as a Key Ingredient for Leadership Development,” in _Future of Leadership Development_ , ed. S. E. Murphy and R. E. Riggio (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 2003), pp. 129–147; R. Vecchio and D. M. Brazil, “Leadership and Sex-Similarity: A Comparison in a Military Setting,” _Personnel Psychology_ , vol. 60, 2007, pp. 303–335; and V. L. Goodwin, W. M. Bowler, and J. L. Whittington, “A Social Network Perspective on LMX Relationships: Accounting for the Instrumental Value of Leader and Follower Networks,” _Journal of Management_ , August 2009, pp. 954–980. 

29. See, for instance, C. R. Gerstner and D. V. Day, “MetaAnalytic Review of Leader–Member Exchange Theory: Correlates and Construct Issues,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , December 1997, pp. 827–844; R. Ilies, J. D. Nahrgang, and F. P. Morgeson, “Leader–Member Exchange 

**584** _**Part 5**_ Leading 

   - and Citizenship Behaviors: A Meta-analysis,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , January 2007, pp. 269–277; Z. Chen, W. Lam, and J. A. Zhong, “Leader–Member Exchange and Member Performance: A New Look at Individual-Level Negative Feedback-Seeking Behavior and Team-Level Empowerment Culture,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , January 2007, pp. 202–212; and Z. Zhang, M. Wang, and J. Shi, “Leader-Follower Congruence in Proactive Personality and Work Outcomes: The Mediating Role of Leader-Member Exchange,” _Academy of Management Journal_ , February 2012, pp. 111–130. 

30. R. Eisenberger, G. Karagonlar, F. Stinglhamber, P. Neves, T. Becker, M. Gonzalez-Morales, and M. Steiger-Mueller, “Leader-Member Exchange and Affective Organizational Commitment: The Contribution of Supervisor’s Organizational Embodiment,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , vol. 95, 2010, pp. 1085–1103. 

31. B. M. Bass and R. E. Riggio, _Transformational Leadership_ , 2d ed. (Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., 2006), p. 3. 

32. Leader Making a Difference box based on M. Crowley, “How A World-Class Heart Surgeon Found the One Leadership Trait Many Businesses Are Missing,” _Fast Company Magazine_ online, www.fastcompany.com, August 14, 2014; Z. Budryk, “Cleveland Clinic’s Toby Cosgrove on Critical Skills and Traits for Healthcare Leaders,” _Fierce Healthcare_ online, www. fiercehealthcare.com, March 23, 2016; A. Boissy and T. Gilligan, _Communication the Cleveland Clinic Way_ ,” McGraw Hill, New York, 2016. www.clevelandclinic.org. 

33. B. M. Bass, “Leadership: Good, Better, Best,” _Organizational Dynamics_ , Winter 1985, pp. 26–40; and J. Seltzer and B. M. Bass, “Transformational Leadership: Beyond Initiation and Consideration,” _Journal of Management_ , December 1990, pp. 693–703. 

34. B. J. Avolio and B. M. Bass, “Transformational Leadership, Charisma, and Beyond.” Working paper, School of Management, State University of New York, Binghamton, 1985, p. 14. 

35. B. J. Hoffman, B. H. Bynum, R. F. Piccolo, and A. W. Sutton, “Person-Organization Value Congruence: How Transformational Leaders Influence Work Group Effectiveness,” _Academy of Management Journal_ , August 2011, pp. 779–796; G. Wang, In-Sue Oh, S. H. Courtright, and A. E. Colbert, “Transformational Leadership and Performance Across Criteria and Levels: A MetaAnalytic Review of 25 Years of Research,” _Group & Organization Management_ , 36, no. 2, 2011, pp. 223–270; M. Tims, A. B. Bakker, and D. Xanthopoulou, “Do Transformational Leaders Enhance Their Followers’ Daily Work Engagement?,” _The Leadership Quarterly_ , February 2011, pp. 121–131; S. J. Peterson and F. O. Walumbwa, “CEO Positive Psychological Traits, Transformational Leadership, and Firm Performance in High-Technology Start-up and Established Firms,” _Journal of Management_ , April 2009, pp. 348–368; R. S. Rubin, D. C. Munz, and W. H. Bommer, “Leading from Within: The Effects of Emotion Recognition and Personality on Transformational Leadership Behavior,” _Academy of Management Journal_ , October 2005, pp. 845–858; T. A. Judge and J. E. Bono, “Five-Factor Model of Personality and Transformational Leadership,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , October 2000, 

pp. 751–765; B. M. Bass and B. J. Avolio, “Developing Transformational Leadership: 1992 and Beyond,” _Journal of European Industrial Training_ , January 1990, p. 23; and J. J. Hater and B. M. Bass, “Supervisors’ Evaluation and Subordinates’ Perceptions of Transformational and Transactional Leadership,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , November 1988, pp. 695–702. 

36. Y. Ling, Z. Simsek, M. H. Lubatkin, and J. F. Veiga, “Transformational Leadership’s Role in Promoting Corporate Entrepreneurship: Examining the CEO-TMT Interface,” _Academy of Management Journal_ , June 2008, pp. 557–576; A. E. Colbert, A. L. Kristof-Brown, B. H. Bradley, and M. R. Barrick, “CEO Transformational Leadership: The Role of Goal Importance Congruence in Top Management Teams,” _Academy of Management Journal_ February 2008, pp. 81–96; R. F. Piccolo and J. A. Colquitt, “Transformational Leadership and Job Behaviors: The Mediating Role of Core Job Characteristics,” _Academy of Management Journal_ , April 2006, pp. 327–340; O. Epitropaki and R. Martin, “From Ideal to Real: A Longitudinal Study of the Role of Implicit Leadership Theories on Leader– Member Exchanges and Employee Outcomes,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , July 2005, pp. 659–676; J. E. Bono and T. A. Judge, “Self-Concordance at Work: Toward Understanding the Motivational Effects of Transformational Leaders,” _Academy of Management Journal_ , October 2003, pp. 554–571; T. Dvir, D. Eden, B. J. Avolio, and B. Shamir, “Impact of Transformational Leadership on Follower Development and Performance: A Field Experiment,” _Academy of Management Journal_ , August 2002, pp. 735–744; N. Sivasubramaniam, W. D. Murry, B. J. Avolio, and D. I. Jung, “A Longitudinal Model of the Effects of Team Leadership and Group Potency on Group Performance,” _Group and Organization Management_ , March 2002, pp. 66–96; J. M. Howell and B. J. Avolio, “Transformational Leadership, Transactional Leadership, Locus of Control, and Support for Innovation: Key Predictors of Consolidated-Business-Unit Performance,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , December 1993, pp. 891–911; R. T. Keller, “Transformational Leadership and the Performance of Research and Development Project Groups,” _Journal of Management_ , September 1992, pp. 489–501; and Bass and Avolio, “Developing Transformational Leadership.” 

37. F. Vogelstein, “Mighty Amazon,” _Fortune_ , May 26, 2003, pp. 60–74. 

38. F. Walter and H. Bruch, “An Affective Events Model of Charismatic Leadership Behavior: A Review, Theoretical Integration, and Research Agenda,” _Journal of Management_ , December 2009, pp. 1428–1452; A. Pentland, “We Can Measure the Power of Charisma,” _Harvard Business Review_ , January–February 2010, pp. 34–35; J. M. Crant and T. S. Bateman, “Charismatic Leadership Viewed from Above: The Impact of Proactive Personality,” _Journal of Organizational Behavior_ , February 2000, pp. 63–75; G. Yukl and J. M. Howell, “Organizational and Contextual Influences on the Emergence and Effectiveness of Charismatic Leadership,” _Leadership Quarterly_ , Summer 1999, pp. 257–283; and J. A. Conger and R. N. Kanungo, “Behavioral Dimensions of Charismatic Leadership,” in J. A. Conger, R. N. Kanungo et al., _Charismatic Leadership_ (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1988), pp. 78–97. 

**Chapter 16** Leadership **585** 

39. J. A. Conger and R. N. Kanungo, _Charismatic Leadership in Organizations_ (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1998). 

40. M. Sena, “9 of the Most Inspiring Acts of Leadership,” _Fortune_ online, www.fortune.com, March 26, 2015. 

41. F. Walter and H. Bruch, “An Affective Events Model of Charismatic Leadership Behavior: A Review, Theoretical Investigation, and Research Agenda,” _Journal of Management_ , December 2009, pp. 1428–1452; K. S. Groves, “Linking Leader Skills, Follower Attitudes, and Contextual Variables via an Integrated Model of Charismatic Leadership,” _Journal of Management_ , April 2005, pp. 255–277; J. J. Sosik, “The Role of Personal Values in the Charismatic Leadership of Corporate Managers: A Model and Preliminary Field Study,” _Leadership Quarterly_ , April 2005, pp. 221–244; A. H. B. deHoogh, D. N. den Hartog, P. L. Koopman, H. Thierry, P. T. van den Berg, J. G. van der Weide, and C. P. M. Wilderom, “Leader Motives, Charismatic Leadership, and Subordinates’ Work Attitudes in the Profit and Voluntary Sector,” _Leadership Quarterly_ , February 2005, pp. 17–38; J. M. Howell and B. Shamir, “The Role of Followers in the Charismatic Leadership Process: Relationships and Their Consequences,” _Academy of Management Review_ , January 2005, pp. 96–112; J. Paul, D. L. Costley, J. P. Howell, P. W. Dorfman, and D. Trafimow, “The Effects of Charismatic Leadership on Followers’ Self-Concept Accessibility,” _Journal of Applied Social Psychology_ , September 2001, pp. 1821–1844; J. A. Conger, R. N. Kanungo, and S. T. Menon, “Charismatic Leadership and Follower Effects,” _Journal of Organizational Behavior_ , vol. 21, 2000, pp. 747–767; R. W. Rowden, “The Relationship Between Charismatic Leadership Behaviors and Organizational Commitment,” _Leadership & Organization Development Journal_ , January 2000, pp. 30–35; G. P. Shea and C. M. Howell, “Charismatic Leadership and Task Feedback: A Laboratory Study of Their Effects on Self-Efficacy,” _Leadership Quarterly_ , Fall 1999, pp. 375–396; S. A. Kirkpatrick and E. A. Locke, “Direct and Indirect Effects of Three Core Charismatic Leadership Components on Performance and Attitudes,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , February 1996, pp. 36–51; D. A. Waldman, B. M. Bass, and F. J. Yammarino, “Adding to ContingentReward Behavior: The Augmenting Effect of Charismatic Leadership,” _Group & Organization Studies_ , December 1990, pp. 381–394; and R. J. House, J. Woycke, and E. M. Fodor, “Charismatic and Noncharismatic Leaders: Differences in Behavior and Effectiveness,” in Conger and Kanungo, _Charismatic Leadership_ , pp. 103–104. 

42. B. R. Agle, N. J. Nagarajan, J. A. Sonnenfeld, and D. Srinivasan, “Does CEO Charisma Matter? An Empirical Analysis of the Relationships Among Organizational Performance, Environmental Uncertainty, and Top Management Team Perceptions of CEO Charisma,” _Academy of Management Journal_ , February 2006, pp. 161–174. 

43. J. Antonakis, M. Fenley, and S. Liechti, “Learning Charisma,” _Harvard Business Review_ , June 2012, pp. 127–130; J. Antonakis, M. Fenley, and S. Liechti, “Can Charisma Be Taught? Tests of Two Interventions,” _Academy of Management Learning & Education_ , September 2011, pp. 374–396; R. Birchfield, “Creating Charismatic 

   - Leaders,” _Management_ , June 2000, pp. 30–31; S. Caudron, “Growing Charisma,” _Industry Week_ , May 4, 1998, pp. 54–55; and J. A. Conger and R. N. Kanungo, “Training Charismatic Leadership: A Risky and Critical Task,” in Conger and Kanungo, _Charismatic Leadership_ , pp. 309–323. 

44. J. Antonakis et al., “Learning Charisma.” 

45. J. G. Hunt, K. B. Boal, and G. E. Dodge, “The Effects of Visionary and Crisis-Responsive Charisma on Followers: An Experimental Examination,” _Leadership Quarterly_ , Fall 1999, pp. 423–448; R. J. House and R. N. Aditya, “The Social Scientific Study of Leadership: Quo Vadis?,” _Journal of Management_ , vol. 23, no. 3, 1997, pp. 316–323; and R. J. House, “A 1976 Theory of Charismatic Leadership.” In J. G. Hunt & L. L. Larson (Eds.), Leadership: The cutting edge (pp. 189–207). Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University, 1977. 

46. This definition is based on M. Sashkin, “The Visionary Leader,” in Conger and Kanungo et al., _Charismatic Leadership_ , pp. 124–125; B. Nanus, _Visionary Leadership_ (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1992), p. 8; N. H. Snyder and M. Graves, “Leadership and Vision,” _Business Horizons_ , January–February 1994, p. 1; and J. R. Lucas, “Anatomy of a Vision Statement,” _Management Review_ , February 1998, pp. 22–26. 

47. B. Nanus, _Visionary Leadership_ (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1992), p. 8. 

48. Chris Chang, “Alibaba’s ‘Dream-driven’ Vision for Taking Over the World,” _News.com Australia_ , November 1, 2016, http://www.news.com.au/finance/business/retail/alibabasdreamdriven-vision-for-taking-over-the-world/news-story/6 9473a9c2404811bef65b69eba4ed5df (accessed January 10, 2017); Jonathen Ringen, “How LEGO Became the Apple of Toys,” _Fast Company_ , January 8, 2015, https://www .fastcompany.com/3040223/when-it-clicks-it-clicks (accessed January 10, 2017). 

49. Ashwin Naik, “Empathy, Not Bureaucracy, Makes Organizations Great; Leadership Lessons from Anand Mahindra,” _Forbes_ , July 6, 2016, http://www.forbes.com/ sites/chrismyers/2017/01/01/this-entrepreneurs-3-new-yearsresolutions-for-2017/#557ff4b9140c (accessed January 6, 2017); Reshma Kapadia, “Anand Mahindra: Mahindra & Mahindra, Managing Director Since 1997,” _Barron’s_ , March 19, 2016, http://www.barrons.com/articles/profiles-of-theworlds-best-ceos-1458364872 (accessed January 6, 2017). 

50. S. P. Robbins and T. A. Judge, _Organizational Behavior_ , 17th ed. (Boston: Pearson Education, Inc., 2017) 

51. P. Economy, “Top 10 Skills Every Great Leader Needs to Succeed,” _Inc_ online, www.inc.com, December 29, 2014. 

52. G. Loftus, “Mary Barra’s Leadership Legacy,” _Forbes_ online, www.fortune.com, March 19, 2014. 

53. Ibid. 

54. S. Caminiti, “What Team Leaders Need to Know,” _Fortune_ , February 20, 1995, pp. 93–100. 

55. Ibid. p. 93. 

56. Ibid. p. 100. 

57. N. Lankarani, “Bold Decisions Require Cool Analysis,” _The New York Times_ online, www.nytimes.com, April 24, 2016. 

58. A. Bryant, “Jane Rosenthal: Keep Coaxing Out the Spark in Others,” _The New York Times_ online, www.nytimees.com, May 20, 2016. 

**586** _**Part 5**_ Leading 

59. S. B. Sitkin and J. R. Hackman, “Developing Team Leadership: An Interview with Coach Mike Krzyzewski,” _Academy of Management Learning and Education_ , September 2011, pp. 494–501; and N. Steckler and N. Fondas, “Building Team Leader Effectiveness: A Diagnostic Tool,” _Organizational Dynamics_ , Winter 1995, p. 20. 

60. R. S. Wellins, W. C. Byham, and G. R. Dixon, _Inside Teams_ (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1994), p. 318. 

61. Steckler and Fondas, “Building Team Leader Effectiveness,” p. 21. 

62. Annie Bricker, “Man of the People,” _Computer News Middle East_ , January 18, 2016, http://www.cnmeonline.com/ciospotlight/man-of-the-people/ (accessed January 6, 2017). 

63. See J. R. P. French Jr. and B. Raven, “The Bases of Social Power,” in _Group Dynamics: Research and Theory_ , ed. D. Cartwright and A. F. Zander (New York: Harper & Row, 1960), pp. 607–623; P. M. Podsakoff and C. A. Schriesheim, “Field Studies of French and Raven’s Bases of Power: Critique, Reanalysis, and Suggestions for Future Research,” _Psychological Bulletin_ , May 1985, pp. 387–411; R. K. Shukla, “Influence of Power Bases in Organizational Decision Making: A Contingency Model,” _Decision Sciences_ , July 1982, pp. 450–470; D. E. Frost and A. J. Stahelski, “The Systematic Measurement of French and Raven’s Bases of Social Power in Workgroups,” _Journal of Applied Social Psychology_ , April 1988, pp. 375–389; and T. R. Hinkin and C. A. Schriesheim, “Development and Application of New Scales to Measure the French and Raven (1959) Bases of Social Power,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , August 1989, pp. 561–567. 

64. D. Sturt and T. Nordstrom, “5 Traits of the Worst Leaders and How to Avoid Them,” _Forbes_ online, www.forbes.com, April 28, 2016. 

65. J. M. Kouzes and B. Z. Posner, _Credibility: How Leaders Gain and Lose It, and Why People Demand It_ (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1993), p. 14. 

66. Based on F. D. Schoorman, R. C. Mayer, and J. H. Davis, “An Integrative Model of Organizational Trust: Past, Present, and Future,” _Academy of Management Review_ , April 2007, pp. 344–354; G. M. Spreitzer and A. K. Mishra, “Giving up Control Without Losing Control,” _Group & Organization Management_ , June 1999, pp. 155–187; R. C. Mayer, J. H. Davis, and F. D. Schoorman, “An Integrative Model of Organizational Trust,” _Academy of Management Review_ , July 1995, p. 712; and L. T. Hosmer, “Trust: The Connecting Link Between Organizational Theory and Philosophical Ethics,” _Academy of Management Review_ , April 1995, p. 393. 

67. P. L. Schindler and C. C. Thomas, “The Structure of Interpersonal Trust in the Workplace,” _Psychological Reports_ , October 1993, pp. 563–573. 

68. H. H. Tan and C. S. F. Tan, “Toward the Differentiation of Trust in Supervisor and Trust in Organization,” _Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Monographs_ , May 2000, pp. 241–260. 

69. H. H. Brower, S. W. Lester, M. A. Korsgaard, and B. R. Dineen, “A Closer Look at Trust Between Managers and Subordinates: Understanding the Effects of Both Trusting and Being Trusted on Subordinate Outcomes,” _Journal of Management_ , April 2009, pp. 327–347; R. C. Mayer and M. B. Gavin, “Trust in Management and Performance: Who Minds the Shop While the Employees Watch the Boss?” 

_Academy of Management Journal_ , October 2005, pp. 874– 888; and K. T. Dirks and D. L. Ferrin, “Trust in Leadership: Meta-Analytic Findings and Implications for Research and Practice,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , August 2002, pp. 611–628. 

70. See, for example, Dirks and Ferrin, “Trust in Leadership: Meta-Analytic Findings and Implications for Research and Practice”; J. K. Butler Jr., “Toward Understanding and Measuring Conditions of Trust: Evolution of a Conditions of Trust Inventory,” _Journal of Management_ , September 1991, pp. 643–663; and F. Bartolome, “Nobody Trusts the Boss Completely—Now What?” _Harvard Business Review_ , March– April 1989, pp. 135–142. 

71. P. H. Kim, K. T. Dirks, and C. D. Cooper, “The Repair of Trust: A Dynamic Bilateral Perspective and Multilevel Conceptualization,” _Academy of Management Review_ , July 2009, pp. 401–422; R. Zemke, “The Confidence Crisis,” _Training_ , June 2004, pp. 22–30; J. A. Byrne, “Restoring Trust in Corporate America,” _BusinessWeek_ , June 24, 2002, pp. 30– 35; S. Armour, “Employees’ New Motto: Trust No One,” _USA Today_ , February 5, 2002, p. 1B; J. Scott, “Once Bitten, Twice Shy: A World of Eroding Trust,” _New York Times_ , April 21, 2002, p. WK5; J. Brockner, P. A. Siegel, J. P. Daly, T. Tyler, and C. Martin, “When Trust Matters: The Moderating Effect of Outcome Favorability,” _Administrative Science Quarterly_ , September 1997, p. 558; and J. Brockner, P. A. Siegel, J. P. Daly, T. Tyler, and C. Martin, “When Trust Matters: The Moderating Effect of Outcome Favorability,” _Administrative Science Quarterly_ , September 1997, p. 558. 

72. T. Vinas, “DuPont: Safety Starts at the Top,” _Industry Week_ , July 2002, p. 55. 

73. A. Srivastava, K. M. Bartol, and E. A. Locke, “Empowering Leadership in Management Teams: Effects on Knowledge Sharing, Efficacy, and Performance,” _Academy of Management Journal_ , December 2006, pp. 1239–1251; P. K. Mills and G. R. Ungson, “Reassessing the Limits of Structural Empowerment: Organizational Constitution and Trust as Controls,” _Academy of Management Review_ , January 2003, pp. 143–153; W. A. Rudolph and M. Sashkin, “Can Organizational Empowerment Work in Multinational Settings?,” _Academy of Management Executive_ , February 2002, pp. 102–115; C. Gomez and B. Rosen, “The Leader–Member Link Between Managerial Trust and Employee Empowerment,” _Group & Organization Management_ , March 2001, pp. 53–69; C. Robert and T. M. Probst, “Empowerment and Continuous Improvement in the United States, Mexico, Poland, and India,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , October 2000, pp. 643–658; R. C. Herrenkohl, G. T. Judson, and J. A. Heffner, “Defining and Measuring Employee Empowerment,” _Journal of Applied Behavioral Science_ , September 1999, p. 373; R. C. Ford and M. D. Fottler, “Empowerment: A Matter of Degree,” _Academy of Management Executive_ , August 1995, pp. 21–31; and W. A. Rudolph, “Navigating the Journey to Empowerment,” _Organizational Dynamics_ , Spring 1995, pp. 19–32. 

74. T. A. Stewart, “Just Think: No Permission Needed,” _Fortune_ , January 8, 2001, pp. 190–192. 

75. M. Elliott, “Who Needs Charisma?” _Time_ , July 20, 2009, pp. 35–38. 

**Chapter 16** Leadership **587** 

76. A. Ignatius and D. McGinn, “Novo Nordisk CEO Lars Sørensen on What Propelled Him to the Top,” _Harvard Business Review_ , November 2015. 

77. House, “Leadership in the Twenty-First Century,” p. 443; M. F. Peterson and J. G. Hunt, “International Perspectives on International Leadership,” _Leadership Quarterly_ , Fall 1997, pp. 203–231; and J. R. Schermerhorn and M. H. Bond, “Cross-Cultural Leadership in Collectivism and High Power Distance Settings,” _Leadership & Organization Development Journal_ , vol. 18, no. 4/5, 1997, pp. 187–193. 

78. R. J. House, P. J. Hanges, S. A. Ruiz-Quintanilla, P. W. Dorfman et al., “Culture Specific and Cross-Culturally Generalizable Implicit Leadership Theories: Are the Attributes of Charismatic/Transformational Leadership Universally Endorsed?,” _Leadership Quarterly_ , Summer 1999, pp. 219–256; and D. E. Carl and M. Javidan, “Universality of Charismatic Leadership: A Multi-Nation Study,” paper presented at the National Academy of Management Conference, Washington, DC, August 2001. 

79. D. E. Carl and M. Javidan, “Universality of Charismatic Leadership: A Multi-Nation Study,” paper presented at the National Academy of Management Conference, Washington, DC, August 2001. 

80. 2015 Training Industry Report, _Training_ , November/ December 2015, pp. 20–33. 

81. See, for example, D. S. DeRue and N. Wellman, “Developing Leaders via Experience: The Role of Developmental Challenge, Learning Organization, and Feedback Availability,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , July 2009, pp. 859–875; A. A. Vicere, “Executive Education: The Leading Edge,” _Organizational Dynamics_ , Autumn 1996, pp. 67–81; J. Barling, T. Weber, and E. K. Kelloway, “Effects of Transformational Leadership Training on Attitudinal and Financial Outcomes: A Field Experiment,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , December 1996, pp. 827– 832; and D. V. Day, “Leadership Development: A Review in Context,” _Leadership Quarterly_ , Winter 2000, pp. 581–613. 

82. G. Petriglieri, “How to Really Customize Leadership Development,” _Harvard Business Review_ online, www.hbr.org, February 18, 2016. 

   84. K. Y. Chan and F. Drasgow, “Toward a Theory of Individual Differences and Leadership: Understanding the Motivation to Lead,” _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , June 2001, pp. 481–498. 

   85. M. Sashkin, “The Visionary Leader,” in _Charismatic Leadership, ed._ J. A. Conger, R. N. Kanungo et al. (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1988), p. 150. 

   86. S. Kerr and J. M. Jermier, “Substitutes for Leadership: Their Meaning and Measurement,” _Organizational Behavior and Human Performance_ , December 1978, pp. 375–403; J. P. Howell, P. W. Dorfman, and S. Kerr, “Leadership and Substitutes for Leadership,” _Journal of Applied Behavioral Science_ 22, no. 1, 1986, pp. 29–46; J. P. Howell, D. E. Bowen, P. W. Dorfman, S. Kerr, and P. M. Podsakoff, “Substitutes for Leadership: Effective Alternatives to Ineffective Leadership,” _Organizational Dynamics_ , Summer 1990, pp. 21–38; and P. M. Podsakoff, B. P. Niehoff, S. B. MacKenzie, and M. L. Williams, “Do Substitutes for Leadership Really Substitute for Leadership? An Empirical Examination of Kerr and Jermier’s Situational Leadership Model,” _Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes_ , February 1993, pp. 1–44. 

   87. “The David Rubenstein Show: Indra Nooyi,” _Bloomberg_ , November 23, 2016, https://www.bloomberg.com; Jennifer Reingold, “PepsiCo’s CEO was Right. Now what?,” _Fortune_ , June 5, 2015, http://fortune.com; Marcus Fairs, “”Design is improving the top line and the bottom line,” says PepsiCo CEO,” Dezeen, May 4, 2016, https://www.dezeen.com; and Jane Burkit, “Why Quotas are Out and Openness is in at PepsiCo”, _The Guardian_ , April 17, 2013 https://www .theguardian.com. 

   88. J. Faragher, “Get the Leader You Deserve,” _People Management_ , October, 2014, pp. 22–26; T. Team, “The Secret Sauce for Success in The Aggressive Beauty Business,” _Forbes_ online, www.forbes.com, April 13, 2015; H. Hong and Y. Doz, “L’Oreal Masters Multiculturalism,” _Harvard Business Review_ online, www.hbr.org, June, 2013; “ECI Honors L’Oréal’s Top Ethics Officer for Leadership in Corporate Ethics,” _ECI Connector_ online, http://connects.ethics.org, January 21, 2016; www.ethisphere.com, www.loreal.com. 

83. D. Medland, “Today’s Gender Reality in Statistics, or Making Leadership Attractive to Women,” _Forbes_ online, www.forbes. com, March 7, 2016. 

